---
source_location: "page 9r-10v"
---
In nomine Jesv CHRISTI. Amen.

Anno 1582. Martÿ die. 10. hora 11¼ Ante meridiem. Saterday.

One Mr Edward Talbot cam to my howſe, and he being willing and deſyrous
to see or shew ſom̅e thing in spirituall practise, wold haue had me to haue
done ſom̅e thing therein. And I truely excuſed my ſelf therein: as not in
the, vulgarly accownted Magik, neyther studied, or [e?]xerciſed: But confeſsed
my ſelf, long tyme to have byn desyrous to have help in my philosophicall studies
through the Cumpany and information of the blessed Angels of God. And there
uppon, I browght forth to him, my stone in the frame (which was given me of
a fr[e?]nde) and I sayd unto him, that I was credibly informed, that to it
(after a ſort) were anſwerable Aliqui Angeli bom. And allſo that I was
ones willed by a Skryer, to call for the good Angel Anchor, to appere in that
stone to my owne sight. And therefore I deſyred him, to call him: and (yf
he wold) Anachor and Amilos likewise, accownted good Angels. For I was
not prepared thereunto. & He than ſettled him ſelf to the Action: and
on his knees att my deſk (setting the stone before him) fell to prayer and
entreaty & In the mean space, I, in my Oratory did pray, and make
motion to god, and his good Creatures for the furdering of this Action.
And within one quarter of an howre (or less) he had sight of one in the
stone. but he still expected for two more: deeming this to be one of
the three (namely Anchor Anachor Amilos). But I then cam to him,
to the stone: And after som̅e thanks to God, and Wellcome to the good
Creature, vſed, I required to know his name. And he spake plainly,
(to the hearing of . E.T.) that his name is VRIEL.
Δ ⸺ Are you one of them (sayd I, John̅ Dee) that are anſwerable, (uppon
due observations performed) to this stone?
VRIEL ⸺ I am.
Δ ⸺ Are there any more beſyde you?
VR ⸺ Michaël and Raphaël. But, Michaël est princ[o?]ps in operibus nostros.
Δ ⸺ ys my boke, of Soyga, of any excellency?
VR ⸺ Liber ille, erat Ad[?] in Paradiſo reuelatus, per Angelos Dei bonos.
Δ ⸺ Will you give me any instructions, how I may read those Tables of Soyga?
VR ⸺ I can ⸺ But solus Michaël illius libri est interpretator.
Δ ⸺ I was told, that after I could read that boke, I shold Liue but two
yeres and a half.
VR ⸺ Thou ſhallt Liue an Hundred and od yeres.
Δ ⸺ What may I, or muſt I do, to have the sight, and preſence, of
Michael, that blessed Angel?
VR ⸺ Præſent[a?]s [m̅as?] postulate et invocate, sinceritate et humilitatus.
Et Anchor, Anachor, et Amilos, non ſunt in hunc Lapidem invocandi.
Δ ⸺ Oh, my great and Long deſyre hath byn to be hable to read thoſe Tables
of Soyga.
VR ⸺ H[æ?]c maximè reſp[i?]ciunt Michaëlem. Michaël est Angelus,
que illuminat [?]ressay tuos. Et h[æ?]c revelantur in Virtute et Veritate
non vi.
Δ ⸺ Is there any speciall tyme, or howre to be obſerved, to deale for
the en(?)ymy of Michael?
VR ⸺ Omnis hora; est hora nobis.
Δ ⸺ After this, there appeared in the stone a strange scale, or
character[?]us of this faſhion enſ[?]:
Δ ⸺ What is the intent, or vſe of this?
*VR ⸺ Sigillum hoc in auro sculpendum, ad de[f?]enſione corporis, omni
Loco, tempore et occaſione. et in p[ec?]tus gestandum.
Δ ⸺ So we [?]ſed, with thanks to god: and I [?] [much?] this
Action: and layd all vp in mynde, and w[?].
Δ ⸺ Soli Deo Honor omnis, et gloria.
Amen.

* * *

The same Saterday after none. Hora. [4?].

Δ ⸺ After that Mr E.T. had called Vriel, and I was com̅e to the stone
and had vſed a short speche of thanks giving to God: [?] I then required
some instruction for the purpose of Soyga
VR ⸺ Peace. you muſt vſe Michaël.
Δ ⸺ I know no meanes or order to vſe in the invocation of Michaël
VR ⸺ He is to be invocated by certayn of the pſalmes of David, and
prayers. The which pſalmes, are nothing els, but a means unto the
seat and Maiestie of God: whereby you gather with your ſelves due
powre; to apply your natures to the holy Angels. I mean the pſalmes,
commonly called the Seven pſalmes. You must vſe pleaſant ſa[?]rs:
with hand and hart: Whereby you ſhall allure him and wy[n?] him
(through Gods favour) to atteyn vnto the thing, you have long sowght for.
There must be Con[?]ction of myndes in prayer, betyxt you two, to
God contynually.
Yt is the wyll of God, that you ſhold, [?]tly, haue the knowledge
of his Angells togither
You had atteyned vnt the Sight of Michaël, but for the imperfection
of Saul.
Be of good Cumfort.
Δ ⸺ The chayre? cam into the stone againe: and I axed what
it ment.
VR⸺ This is a seat of perfection: from the which, things ſhall be
ſh[?] vnt the, which thou hast Long desyred.
Δ ⸺ Then was there a square Table browght into the stone: and I
demanded, what that Table betokened.
VR ⸺ A Mysterie, not yet to be known. These two, ſhall remayn
in the stone, to the sight of all vndefyled Creatures.
you must vſe a towre square Table, two cubits square: Where vppon
muſt be set Sigillum Dei D[?]tatis, which is allready *perfected in a
boke of thyne: Blessed be god, in all his Myſteries, and Holy in
all his works. This seal muſt not be loked on, without great reurence
and deuotion. This seale is to be made of perfect wax. I mean, wax,
which is clean purified: we haue no respect of cullours.
This seal muſt be 9 ynches in diameter: The rowndness muſt be 27
ynches, and somwhat more. The Thicknes of it, must be of an ynche
and half a quarter. and a figure of a crosse, must be on the back ſide
of it, made thus:

* * *

The Table is to be made of swete wood: and to be of two Cubits high
with 4 feate: with 4 of the former seales vnder the 4 feet.
Δ ⸺ The faſhion of the 4 feet, standing vppon the foreſayd rownd ſeales,
was ſhewed: ſo as the vttermost circle conteyning the letters, did ſeme to be
clean *without the cumpas of the fete, equally rownd about the same fete.
And these seales were ſhewed [much?] lesser than the principall seal.
Vnder the Table did ſome to be layd red sylk, two yardes square.
And ouer the seal, did seme likewise red sylk to [lye?] fowr square: somwhat
braoder th[e?]n the Table, hanging down with 4 knops of taſsells at the
4 corners thereof.
Vppon this vppermost red silk, did ſeme to be set the stone with the frame: nigh
ouer, and vppon the principall seal: [?]a[?]ing that the sayd sylk was betwene
the one and the other.
The Table was ſhewed to have on the fowre sides of it, *Characters and names
these, that are in a schedule annexed, in 4 diuerese rowes.
VR ⸺ The characters and words on the sides of the square Table, are to
be written with yellow, made of perfect oyle, vſed in the church.
Δ ⸺ What oyl is that
VR ⸺ of oyl ſhalbe opened vnto you. The oyle, is perfect prayers
of other oyle I have no respect.
We sanctifie, bycauſe we are holy: and you sanctify bycauſe of your holines.
VR ⸺ There is a spirit, named Lundrumguffa vſing you
who seketh your deſtruction, in the hatred of men, in  the hurt of
thy goods. Diſcharge him to morrow with Brymstone.
He harmeth thy howſe, and ſeketh the deſtruction of thy dowghter.
His pretence was to have maymed the in thy sholder the last night,
and long ago. Yf thow do not diſcharge him to morrow,
he will hurt, both thy wife and thy dowghter.
He is here *now
Giue him a generall dyſcharge from your family and howſe
He will seke Sauls death, who is accurſed.
Δ ⸺ I know no means, or art to do this by. For I did burn in flame
of Brymſtone, Maher.?] his name and Character, whan I fownd
Saul pr[?] dealing with him (which manner of wicked dealing
I had oft forbydden him) and yet he cam after, and wold haue
carryed Saul away quick: as Robert Hilton, [Gewrgo?], and other
of my howſe can teſtify.
VR ⸺ The Curſed will com̅e to the curſed.
Δ ⸺ I beſeche you to diſcharge him: and to bynde him ſo[?]
whrefor of, as Raphaël did (for Thobias sake) with the wydked
spirit Asmodeus
VR ⸺ But Thobias did his part. Art is vayne, in respect
of Go dhis powre. Brymstone is a mean
Δ ⸺ Whan ſhall I do this?
VR ⸺ To morrow at the tyme of prayers.
Δ ⸺ Gloria [?] et filio et spiritus sancto
sicut [?]. Amen.
