---
edition_key: "manuscript"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 8r-8v"
---
Anno 1581. Decembris 22. Mane.

Δ After my fervent prayers made to God , for his m{er}cif{ull}
  {...} {....} and inſtruction , the {....} the ministry of his
  h{..} and my {...} Angel , named Anael , ({yf} {it} {.a.}
  his Divine pleasure) I willed, the Skryer, (named
  Saul) to loke into my great Chryſtaline Globe, yf
  God ‹has› had sent his holy Angel Aneal, or no:
And Saul loking into my {.}or{....}s stone, (or Chryſtall Globe)
for to s{...}e Anael , he {found} there Δone, {...}i{..} answ{ered} to
that name . But being {....}ſt{..} {....}ſt{.}s of me to tell
the Truthe yf he was Anaël , An other did ap{p...}
very bewtifull , with apparill yellow, glittering, like gold . and his
hed had beames like ſt{e}r beams , blasing , and spredding from it ; his eyes
fyrie . He wrote in the stone very much hebrue in hebrue letters , and the
letters seamed all transparent gold. Which, Saul was not able {e}yther
presently to reade , that I might wri{te} after his voyce , neyther to
imitate the letters in short tyme .
A bright st{e}r , did go vp and and down by him .
There appeared allso a {wh}ite* dog , with a long hed.
And many other visions appeared, with this second: the first being voyded
    quite away .            Therevppon I sayd, as follow{e}th.
Δ ⸺ In nomine Jesu Christi , quis tu es ? — he anſwered to Saul his hearing .
AN. ⸺ Potest{as} omnis , in me sit{a} est .
Δ ⸺ qu{æ} ?
AN ⸺ Bona, et mala .
Δ ⸺ Then appeared in the stone , these two letters M. G.
I then axing him ſom̅e queſtions , de Thoſaur{o} abſcondito :
       he anſwered ,
AN ⸺ Ne perturbes : Nam h{æ} ſ{un}t Nu{.æ}.
                            And withall appeared many {d}edd mens skulls,
                             on his left hand.
     He ſayd to me,
AN. ⸺ Vbi est potestas tua ?
Δ ⸺ Cur qu{æ}ris {..}e potestate aliqua mea ?
AN. ⸺ Cur ? Signifi:, non mihi placet .
Δ ⸺ I, therevppon , set by him , the stone in the frame :
     and sayd .
Δ ⸺ An bon{us} aliquis Angelus , assignatus est huic speculo ?
AN. ⸺ Etiam .
Δ ⸺ Quis ?
AN. ⸺ —‏‎מִי‏כָאֵל — he answered, by the shew of these letters {on} my ſtone
Δ ⸺ Bo{nus} ne ille Angelus, de qͦ in scripturus f{..} mentio ?
AN. ⸺ Maximè .
Δ ⸺ Tieri ne potest , qùod ego eundem vide{am}, et cu̅ illo a{q}am ?
AN. ⸺ Ita.       and therewith appeared this character ⸺ A
Δ ⸺ Quid p{e}r hoc, significare velis ?
AN ⸺ Alterius Angeli character est .
Δ ⸺ Cur hîc ; et nunc ostendis ?
AN ⸺ Cauſam ob magn[u?]m — Make an ende : It ſhalbe declared, but not by me{.}
Δ ⸺ By whome then ?
AN ⸺ By him that is aſsigned to the stone : but not , tyll after the feast . And then thow
     muſt prepare thy ſelf , to prayer and faſting
In the Name of God , be Secret : and in all thy doings praying, tyll thow haſt thy
desyre : which shall not be far of .
After Newyeres tyde , Deale , But not on the Sabaath day
Pray continually .
When it ſhall pleas god , to stir the vp , Then procede. In the brightest day ,
when the Sonne shyneth : In the morning , fasting , begynne to pray .
In the Sonne Set the stone .
Deale both Kneeling, and sitting . I have done for this tyme
My name is ANNAEL .
I will speak ones more to the : and than fare well : for thow ſhalt not
haue me any more.
                 Be not hasty in wrath .
Δ ⸺ Is this, that, you ment to speak ?
AN. ⸺ I. Do good to all men . God hath ſufficient for the, and for all men.
                        Fare well .
Δ ⸺ Gloria patri et filio et spiritui sancto . Sicut erat in principio ,
                et nunc et semper : et in sæcula sæculorũ
                            Amen .
Δ ⸺ Remember, that diuerse other particulars, mowght have byn Noted of this daye
        Action : but these may suffice:. And yet it is not to ‸be forgotten , that
        as he sayd his name was Annael (with a dubble n ) to be allſo confeſsed
        him ſelf to be the same Annaël which is prepos{itu}s orbis veneris :
        and allſo Chief governor Generall of this great period , as I haue
        Noted in my boke of Famous and rich Dyscoueries .
