---
edition_key: "manuscript"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 10v-11r"
---
1582 Martÿ 11

Sonday. a Meridie hora .3ͣ. circiter

Δ ⸺ Vriel being called by. E.T. there appeared one, clothed with a
   long robe, of purple : all spa{ng}ed with gold. and on his hed, a
   garland, or wreath of gold : his eyes sparkling . of whome asked I ‹.› ‹axed›
   Whether the characters {no}ted for the Table, wer perfect :
   He anſwered ,
⸺ They are Δ*perfect : there is no question
Δ ⸺ Are you Vriel.
 Than preſently cam in one, and threw the brave spirit down by the
  sholders : and bet him mightyly with a whip : and toke all his robes,
  and apparell of him : and then he remayned all hea{.}y and {o}w{y}gly .
  and styll the sprit was beaten of him , who cam in after him . And
  that spirit , which so bet him, sayed to the hearing of my skryer ,
  Lo, thus are the wyked skourged
Δ ⸺ Are you Vriel , who speaketh that ?
VRI ⸺ I am he.       Write down and mark this : for it is
worthy of the Noting .
This was thy perſecutor Lundrumguſta . I browght him hither : to let
   the see, how God hath puniſhed thy enemy
Lo, thus, hath God delt for the : Lo thus haue I delt for the :
   Thank God.
Δ ⸺ blessed be his holy name , and extolled, World with out ende .
E.T. ⸺ he drew the wyked spirit away , by the leggs, and threw him
  into a great pitt . and waſhed his hands , as it were , with the sweat
  of his ‹hed› own hed . for he ſeamed to be all in ‹‸{.}› ‹sweat› . a sweat.
Δ ⸺ Here vppon , my skryer ſaw Vriel go away : and he remayned out of
   sight a little while . Then he cam in agayn : and an other with
   him : and iointly thoſe two ſaid to gather. Glorifie God for euer.
   And than Vriel did ſtand behinde : and the other did set down in the
   chayre, with a sworde in his right hand : all his hed glyſtring like
   the Sonne . The heare of his hed was long : He had wings : and all his
   lower parts seamed to be with feathers . He had a roab ouer his
   body : and a great light in his left hand . he ſayd
Michaël ⸺ We are blessed from the begynning : and blessed be the name of
   God for euer.
Δ ⸺ My skryer ſaw an innumerable Cumpany of Angels abowt him :
    And Vriel did lean on the square table by .
   He that sat in the chayre (whom we take to be Michaël ) sayd
    Than.
     ⸺ Go forward : God hath blessed the
        I will be thy Guyde
        Thow shallt a{u}ey{n}e vnto thy sechmy
        The World begynns with thy doings
                    Prayſe God .
      The Angels vnder my powre, ſhall be at thy commandment
      Lo, I will do thus much for the
      Lo, God will do thus much for the
      Thow shalt see me : and I will be seen of the
       And I will direct thy liuing and converſation
       N Thoſe that sowght thy life , are vaniſhed away.
                  Put up vp thy pen .
       Δ ⸺ so he departed.
       Δ ⸺ Gloria, {lau}s, honor, virtus et Imperium
           Deo immortali , invisibili , et
            Omnipotenti , in sæcula s{æ}culorũ
                     Amen
