---
edition_key: "manuscript"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 17r-29v"
published: false
---
[?] [my?]ſteryes , [?]
[?] [?]ow toward a thing, [?]
[?] [?]owſe is hollow , it is empty and voyde [?]
[?]ts : The God of heuen and erth, will ſend [?]
NOTE . We bring tydings *of light. The lord is o[?]
yo[u?] and we prayſe to gither. His name be prayſed for eu̅ [?]
in his Myſtries : O holy and eternall God .
Δ. he bowed down to the Chayre and then to the table , and sayd , Bene
dictus qui venit in , ( and there ſtayed a little ) ſayd agayn Bene
dictus qui venit in [n?]oi͠e Domini
Δ Than cam in Michaël , with a ſword in his hand, as he was wont [:?] and I
ſayd vnt[o] him , are you Michael .
Mich: Dowt not: I am he which reiyoce in him that reioycath in the
Fortitude and strength of God .
Δ Is this forme, for the Great Seale, perfect ?
Mi. The forme is true and perfect
Thow ſhalt sweare by the Liuing God , the strength of his Mercy, and
his Medicinall vertue, powred into mans sowle neuer to diſcloſe theſe
Myſteries
Δ yf No man, by no means, ſhall p[?]ue any thing herof, by me , I wold
think that I ſhold not do well.
Mi. Nöthing is cujt from the Churche of God . We in his Sain[?]ts
are bleſsed for euer .
We Separate the, from fy[l?]ed and wycked perſons : We move the to God .
Δ I vow, as you require : God be my help , and Gwyde, now and euer
amen .
MIC. This a Myſtery , ſkarſe worthy for vs our ſelues , to know , muche
lesso to Reueale. Art thow, then, ſo Contented ?
Δ . I am : God be my strength.
MIC. Blessed art thow among the Saints : And blessed are you
both .
I will pluck the, from among the wycked [Δ he spake to my skryer]
Thow Commytteſt Idolatry
But take hede of Temptation :
The Lord hath bleſsed the . This is a Myſtery .
Dee, what wouldſt thow haue ?
Δ Recte sapere. et intelligere. E[o?]
MIC. Thy deſyre is gra[u?]nted the.
[?] [?]wit[?]
[?] [they?] are corrupted . [?]
[?] [?]y haue byn vſed to the wycked [?]
page (20)
[?] will ſhew the in the mighty hand and strength of you , [?]
his Myſteries are : The true circle of his æter[al?] [?]
Comprehending all vertue : The whole and sacred Trinitie [?]
Oh , holy be he : Oh , holy be he : Oh, holy be he .
Vriel answered . Amen .
Mic. Now what wilt thow ? Δ I wold full fayne procede
according to the matter in hand .
Mi. Diuide this owtward circle into 40 æquall partes :
whoſe greateſt numbers are fowre . See thow do it presently .
Δ. I did so . Diuiding it first into fowre : and then every of
them into ten. He called, Semiel . and one cam in
kneled down: and great fyre cam out of his mowth :
Michael ſayde., To him, are the Myſteries of th[e?]ſe Tables know[?]
Michael sayd, Semiel (agayn) and by and by ,‸he ſaid , O God thow hast ſ[o?][?]
and thow liuest for euer . Do not think here I spoake
to him . Δ he spake that to vs, [le?]st we might [dotote?] of his laſt
speches ; as being spoken to Semiel : which he directed to the æternall god
and not to Semiel . Semiel stode vp, and flaming
fire cam out of his mowth : and than he sayd , as followeth.
Sem. Mighty Lord, what woldſt thow with the Tables ?
Mi. It is the will of God , thow fatche them hither.
Sem. I, am his Tables .
Behold th[e?]ſe are his Tables . Lo where they are .
Δ Then cam in 40 white creatures , all in white sylk long robes.
and they like chyldern : and they fallyng on theyr knees sayd
Thow onely art Holy Ho Holy among the higheſt . O God ,
Thy Name, be bleſsed for euer .
Δ Michael ſtode vp out of his chayre , and by and by , all his leggs
semed to be like two great pillars of braſs : and he as high as half
way to the heven . And by and by, his sword was all on fyre
and he ſtroke , or drew his sworde ouer all theyr 40 heds .
The Erth quaked : and the 40 fell down : and Michael called
Semiæl , with a thundring voyce, and sayd ,
Declare the Myſteries of the liuing God , our God , of one
that Liueth for evre .
Sem. I am redy. Δ Michael stroke ouer them , with
his sword agayne : and they all fell down , and Vriel allso [?]
knees And commonly at the ſtriking with his sword , flamyng
like lightening did flash with all .
Mi. Note : here is a Myſterie .

Δ Then stept furth, one of the 40, from the rest, and opened his brest, which
was couered with sylk, and there appeared a great T all of Gold.
Mi. Note the Number. Δ ouer the T, stode the figure of 4; after
[?] manner 4T
[The?] 40, all, cryed, yt liueth and Multiplyeth for euer: blessed be
his name.
Δ That creature did shut vp his bosome, and vanished away, like vnt a fyre.
Mi. Place that, in the first place. It is the name of the Lorde.
Δ Than there seamed a great clap of thunder to be.
Then stepped (before the rest) one other of the 40, and kneled as the other
did before: and a voyce was herd‸ saying, Prayse God, for his name is reuerent.
Michael sayd to me, say after me thus
Deus Deus Deus noster, benedictus es nunc et semper: amen
Deus Deus Deus noster, benedictus es nunc et semper: Amen
Deus Deus Deus noster, benedictus es nunc et semper: amen
Δ Then the Creature opened his breast, and fyre cam oute of the sone
as before and a great romayne G appeared
Mi. Write with reverence, These Mysteries are wunderfull, the
Number of his name, and knowledge
Lo, this it is. 9. Behold, it is but one, and it is Marveylous
Δ Then this Creature vanished away. . . . . . . . . . . .
Mi. The Seale of Gods Mercy: blessed be thy name.
Δ It semed to rayne, as thouwgh it had rayned fyre from heuen.
Then one other of the 40 was browght furth: The rest all fell
down and sayd. Lo, thus is God known.
Then he opened his brest, and then appered an H, (not of so big pro=
portion as the other), with the number of 7 over it.
Mi. Multiplicatum est Nomen [tuum?] in terra
Δ Then that man vanished away as it were in a golden smoke
Mi. Thow must not write these things, but with great devotion.
He Liueth. Δ Then cam an other furth: Then all falling
down sayde, Vidimus Gloriam tuam Domine. They were
prostrate on theyr faces. Then this Creature opened his breast.
and he had there a Tablet all of Gold (as it were) and there
appered a small t vppon it: and the figure of 9 vnder this.
letter t.
Mi. Mark it, for this is a Mystere: Δ Then that shewer (of the 40)
seamed to fly vp into the ayre, like as it were a white garment.
Mi. Illius Gloria sit nobiscum. Δ All sayd, amen: and fell down.
Δ Then stode vp another, and opened his bosom, and shewed on his brest
bare (being like syluer) a small h; and he pointed to it, and ouer it
was the number of 22.
Mi. Et est numerus virtitus benedictas Δ This shew[e?]r went a way like a
Videte Angelos lu[a?]s. White Cok flying vp.
Δ There cam an other in, and sayd
Et sum Finis et non est mihi Numerus. Sum Numerus in numero.
Et omni[s?] Numeras est mihi Numerus. Videte
Δ There appeared a small n on his skyn, being all spotted with Gold

Then he went away. like three fyres, red flaming, and coming to gather
in the myddst of the firmament. Δ you must Note that in y[?]
the whole world in [?] did seme to appere, heuen, and erth. C[?]
Mi. (Δ he cryded with a  lowde voyce) Et est vita in cælis.
Δ Then stepped furth one and sayd, Et ego viuo cu b[e?]ne viuentibus, and withall he [?]
kneeled down: and Michael stepped furth and toke of his v[e?]al[?] on his brest
an[d] he made Curtsy and stode vp.
Mi. Viuamus Halleluyah O sanctum Nomen [?]
Δ All fell down on theyr faces, and Michael stroke ouer them [?]
and a great flash of fyre: And this man his brest seemed op[en?]
hart appeared bleading, and therein the letter m, and 6, o[ver?] it thus 6/m
Mic. Benedictus est. Numerus Ag[?].
Δ Herevppon They all fell down
Mi. Orate invicem Δ Herevppon we prayed a psalme; one ‸my skryer saying one verse, and [then?]
I the other &c.
Mi: Omnia dat[a?] sunt a Deo. Δ Then cam one in, hauing a rownd Tablet in
his forhed and a letter o in his forhed: and 22 ouer it.
Mi. Et non est finis in illo.
Benedictus es tu Deus Δ and then that shower vanished away: He
flew vp, like a rownd raynbow knyt togither at the ends.
Mi. Angeli a nomine tuo proa[dent Domine
Tu es primus O Halleluyah.
Δ. One stode vp and the rest fell down, and out of his mowth that stode, cam
a sworde: and the point, a Δ Triangle, and in the myddest o[f?] it a
small a thus a⃤, of pure gold, grauen very depe:
Et Numerus tuas viuit in cepteris, sayd this shewer. The nu̅ber
was 20 22 ower the a .
This shewer went away with great [?] covering all the world.
Mi. Namen illius est nobiscum Δ. the stroke againe with his
sword ouer them . THen stode one vp : who, vppon his garment had an n : and he turned
abowt: and on his back were very many ([?]ns) n
Mi. Creasti tu Domine Angelos tuos ad Gloriam tua Δ. ouer the, n,
was the number of 14. uer that n (I meane) which was onely on his brest
Mi. Et te primus Creauit Deus Δ. Then the shewer flew vp like a star
And an other cam in, all his cloth being plucked vp: and so seamed naked: He
hath a little, a,. This, a, did go rownd abowt him: begynning at
his feete: and so spirally vpward: and he seemed to be all clay.
ouwer the, a, was the number 6.
Mi. Et Create s[un?]t et pereunt in Nomine tuo. Δ and therwith
this shewer fell down all into dust on the Earth: and his white
garment flew vp, like a white smoke: and allso a white thing did
fly out of his body.
Surgit Innocentia ad faciem Dei.
Δ Michael did ouwer them agayn with his sworde, and it seemed to lighten
He began to speak, and he stopped suddenly, and fyre flew from his mowth
Mi. Innocentium Nomina, et sanguinem vidish Domine a Terra, et Iustus
es in operibus tuis Δ Then cam one in, all with a garment
all bluddy. he was like a chylde, he had a ball in his hand of perfume
which smoked: and he hath vppon his forhed a little h,. He bowed
to Michaël. and Michael sayd, Numerus t[uu?]s est infinity; et erit
to finish re[r?]um. Δ This shewer seemed to power him self awaye
like a flud of blud: and his garment flew vpward
Mi. Non est illi numerus
Omnia per[?] a facie Dei, et a facie Terræ:
Δ. Then stepped one furth, and like a water running rownd abowt him,
and he cryeth miserably, O benedictum Nomen tuu Domine.
Nümer[u?]s perÿt cum illis. Δ A little, o, with 18 ouer it, appered
Δ This shewer seemed to vanish away, and to cause a gerat water remayn
ouer all.
Mi. Lux manet in temb[r?]is. Gloriosum est Nomen tuum.
Δ Then stept one furth from the rest, who fell down, as theyr m[?] was.
Δ Note: All the Cumpanies of these 40, stode five togither, and
five to gither, and so in eight Cumpaneyes; each, of fiue
Δ This was a very white one: The vpper partes of his throate, seemed open
and there seemed to cum out of it fyre, in very many and diuerse cullours.
he sayd Trinus sum.
