---
edition_key: "manuscript"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 11v-12v"
---
Martÿ 14. Wensday. mane circa hora 9ͣ.

Δ ⸺ Being deſirous to procede in this matter , by conſent, we bent
our ſelues to Action . And after that ET had called Vriel
and saw him . I cam to the deſk from my oratorie .
There did contynually appeare , the chayre and the Table.
I than being affrayde that any other ſhold come into the stone,
in stead of Vriel , did erneſtly require the spirituall creature
appearing , to show who he was , and what was his name. :
At length he anſwered , and ſayde to the hearing of E.T.
Vriel is my name , with diuerse called *Nariel .
stay .
Δ ⸺ Then he went away, for a while.: and cam agayn, and ſayd thus,
Vr. ⸺ The strength of God, is allwayes with the.
Doſt thow know, what thow writeſt?
Δ ⸺ In two senſes, I may vnderſtand it : eyther that God the good
Angel ΔGabriel is allwayes with me , thowgh invisibly : or els
that the strength , and mighty hand of God , allwayes is my defenſe
Vr ⸺ Fortitudo Dei, tecum semper est.
Δ ⸺ He went away agayn , and cam agayn , following or wayting vpp[on]
an other . and before that other, was a man hauing his hed all
couered with blak. Then he that cam ſo in the middle , did sit
down in the chayre , and spake this worde following :
Mi ⸺ Note.
Δ ⸺ This was Michael, with his sword in his right hand
Then cam Vriel to the man ( having his hed all hid, as it
were in a blak hode ) and toke of that blak hode : and then
lifted vp the Table cloth. He looked under it , and put it down
againe : and lifted it vp again. The man stode still before
Michael. Then Michaël roſe ; and toke of all the mans
clothes , and left him, as it were, onely in his shirt
Then Vriel toke a little rownd Tablet, as it were, of th[e]
bignes of a sixpence, having
two letters in it, thus :
and gaue it to Michaël .
Vriel lifted vp the Table cloth :
and, from thence, ſeamed to take
apparaile, and put on the man . it ſemed to be sylk : and
very full of wrynkles , or plights . And the man kneeled, and held vp
up his hands . Vriel toke like a lawrell buſh , and set vppon
the mans hed. And than the man kneeled before Michaël.
Michaël toke the rownd thing , with the letters : and gaue it the
man to eat : and he did eat it
VR ⸺ Lo, things are covered .
Δ ⸺ Then he couered the Table and pluckt the cloth over it, down
to the grownd, on euery side . The man roſe vp : And Michael
clubbed him on the hed with his sworde . Then the man ſtode vp
Then the man turned his face toward E.T. the skryer. and the
man did resemble me (Joh̅n Dee) in cowntenance . And then
he turned to Michaël agayn .
Michael wrote vppon the mans back , thus ,
ANGELVS TVÆ PROFESSIONIS.
Δ ⸺ Then .E.T. aſked me, yf there were ſuch Angels of a mans
Profession : and I answered yea ; as in ⁂Agrippa and other, is declared.
MI ⸺ leave your folly : Hold thy peace.
Haue you not red , that they that cleaue vnto God, are made
like vnto him.
Δ ⸺ yes, forſoth.
MIC ⸺ Thow camſt hither to lern, and not to diſpute.
Laudate Dominuni in operibus suis.
Δ ⸺ The man kneled down, and ſo went out of ſight.
MI ⸺ He hath eaten ſtrength against trubble . He hath eaten
nothing. and in eating, he hath eaten all things . The ⁜name
NA, be prayſed in trubbles.
Δ ⸺ Now Michael thruſt out his right arme, with the sword: and bad
the skryer to loke . Then his sword did ſeame to cleaue in two:
and a great fyer, flamed out of it, vehemently. Then he toke a
ring out of the flame of his sworde : and gaue it to Vriel: and
ſayd, thus
MIC ⸺ The strength of God, is vnſpeakable. Prayſed be god,
for euer and euer.
Δ ⸺ Then Vriel did make curſy vnto him.
MI ⸺ After this sort, muſt thy ring be : Note it .
Δ ⸺ Then he roſe, or diſapeared, out of the chayre, and by and by,
cam again, and sayde, as followeth.
MI ⸺ I will reveale the this ring: Which was never revealed
ſince the deth of Salomon : with whom I was preſent. I was
preſent with him in strength, and mercy .
Lo, this it is . This is it, wherewith
all Miracles , and diuine works and wonders
were wrowght by Salomon : This is it,
which I haue revealed vnto the. This
is it, which Philoſophie dreameth of .
This is it, which the Angels skarſe know.
This is it, and blessed be his Name :
yea, his Name be bleſsed for euer.
Δ ⸺ Then he layd the ring down vppon the Table : and sayd,
Note.
Δ ⸺ It shewed to be a Ring of Gold: with a seale graued in it.
and had a rownd thing in the myddle of the seale. and a thing
like a V, throwgh the top of the circle : and an L, in the
bottome , and a barr — cleane throwgh it : And had theſe
fowre letters in it, P E L E
After that, he threw the ring on the borde, or Table : and it ſemed
to fall throwgh the Table : and then he sayde, thus ,
MI ⸺ so shall it do, at thy commandement.
Without this, thow ſhalt do nothing.
Blessed be his name, that cumpaſseth all things :
Wonders are in him, and his Name is WONDERVLL:
His Name worketh wonders, from generation, to generation.
Δ ⸺ Then he went away : and cam in agayn by and by.
MI ⸺ Note
Δ ⸺ Then he browght in the Seale, which he shewed the other
day : and opened his sworde, and bad the skryer, reade; and
he red EMETH
Then the sword cloſed vp agayn: and he ſayde
○MI ⸺ This do I do open vnto the , bycauſe thow mervayledſt
at SIGILLVM DEI. This is the Name of the Seale :
Which be bleſsed for euer. This is the seale self . This is
Holy : This is pure : This is for euer. Amen.
Δ ⸺ Then the seale vaniſhed away. And I sayd to my frende
(the skryer ) In dede, this other day, I considred diuerſe
faſhions of this seal : and I fownd them much differing, one
from an other : and therfore I had nede to know, which of them
I ſhall imitate : or how to make one perfect of them all.
MI ⸺ Dowt not for the making of it : for God hath perfyted
all things . Aſk not the cauſe of my abſence, nor of my
apparell : for that Myſterie, is known to God. I haue no
cloathing , as thow thy ſelf ſhalt see. I am a spirit of
Truth, and Vertue. Yea you ſhall ſee me in Powre, and
I will viset you in HOPE.
Bless you the Lorde , and follow his wayes, for euer.
Δ ⸺ Then he went away : and VRiel followed him .
And then I sayde to my skryer : It were good, we had euer
ſome watch word, when we ſhold not loke for any more matter
at theyr hands, euery tyme of theyr visitting of vs.
Wherevppon, (vnlooked for, of vs,) he spake agayn.
MI ⸺ We lead tyme, Tyme leadeth not vs :
Put vp thy pen.
The Name of God, be blessed for euer.
Δ ⸺ Then they lifted vp theyr hands to heuenward (which heven,
appeared allſo in the stone) and turned us, and sayd.
Valete⸫
Δ ⸺ So they departed : and at theyr going, the chayr, and the Table,
in the stone, did seme to shake
Δ ⸺ Soli Deo oi̅s honor
Laus et Gloria.⸫
Amen.
