---
edition_key: "manuscript"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 9r-10v"
---
In nomine Jesv CHRISTI. Amen.

Anno 1582. Martÿ die. 10. hora 11¼ Ante meridiem. Saterday.

One M ͬ Edward Talbot *cam to my howſe , and ‸he being willing and deſyrous
to see or shew ſom͠e thing in spirituall practise , wold haue had me to haue
done ſom͠e thing therein . And I truely excuſed my ſelf therein : as not in
the, vulgarly accownted Magik , neyther studied, or exerciſed : But confeſsed
my ſelf, long tyme to haue byn desyrous to haue help in my philosophicall studies
throwgh the Cumpany and information of the blessed Angels of God . And there⹀
vppon , I browght forth to him , my stone in the frame ( which was given me of
a frende ) and I sayd vnto him , that I was credibly informed, that to it
( after a ſort ) were anſwerable Aliqui Angeli bom . And allſo that I was
ones willed by a Skryer , to call for the good Angel Anchor , to appere in that
stone to my owne sight . And therefore I deſyred him , to call him : and (yf
he wold) Anachor and Amilos likewise , accownted good Angels. For I was
not prepared therevnto .  &    He then ſettled him ſelf to the Action : and
on his knees att my deſk ( setting the stone before him ) fell to prayer and
entreaty    &c     In the mean space, I, in my Oratory did pray, and make
motion to god , and his good Creatures for the furdering of this Action .
And within one quarter of an howre (or less ) he had sight of one in the
stone . but he still expected for two more : deeming this to be one of
the three ( namely Anchor Anachor Amilos ) . But I then cam to him ,
to the stone : And after som͠e thanks to God, and wellcome to the good
Creature, vſed ; I required to know his name . And he spake plainly ,
(to the hearing of .E.T.) that his name is VRIEL .
Δ ⸺ Are you one of them (sayd I, John̅ Dee) that are anſwerable, (vppon
  due observations performed ) to this stone ?
VRIEL ⸺ I am.
Δ ⸺ Are there any more beſyde you ?
VR ⸺ Michaël and Raphaël . But, Michaël est princeps in operibus nostro{s}
Δ ⸺ ys my boke , of Soyga , of any excellency ?
VR ⸺ Liber ille, erat Ad{æ} in Paradiſo reuelatus , per Angelos Dei bonos .
Δ ⸺ Will you give me any instructions , how I may read thoſe Tables of Soy{ga?}
VR ⸺ I can ⸺ But solus Michaël illius libri est interpretator .
Δ ⸺ I was told , that after I could read that boke , I shold Liue but two
  yeres and a half.
VR ⸺ Thou ſhallt Liue an Hundred and od yeres.
Δ ⸺ What may I, or muſt I do, to haue the sight, and preſence, of
   Michael, that blessed Angel ?
VR ⸺ Præſent{ia}s {.a͠.} postulate et invocate , sinceritate et humilitate
  Et Anchor, Anachor , et Amilos , non ſunt in hunc Lapidem invocandi .
Δ ⸺ Oh, my great and Long deſyre hath byn to be hable to read thoſe Table{s}
  of Soyga .
VR ⸺ H{æ}c maximè reſp{i}ciunt Michaëlem . Michaël est Angelus ,
  qui illuminat {g}re{ssu}s tuos. Et hæc revelantur in virtute et veritate
  non vi .
Δ ⸺ Is there any speciall tyme, or howre to be obſerved, to deale for
   the enioym{y} of Michael ?
VR ⸺ Omnis hora , est hora nobis .
Δ ⸺ After this, there Δappeared in the stone a strange seale, or
   character{iſmus} of this faſhion  enſ{uing} :
Δ ⸺ What is the intent, or vſe of this ?
*VR ⸺ Sigillum hoc in au{r}o sculpendium, ad defenſion͠e corporis, omni
   Loco , tempore et occaſioneſ. et in p{ec}tus gestandum.
Δ ⸺ So we ceaſed , with thanks to god : and I {...}ſt{..} much vppon this
    Action : and layd all vp in mynde, and w{riting} .
                 Δ ⸺ Soli Deo Honor omnis, et gloria.
                                Amen.

* * *

The same Saterday after none . Hora .5.

Δ ⸺ After that M ͬ E.T. had called Vriel , and I was com͠e to the stone
 and had vſed a short speche of thanks giving to God : ‹an› I then required
 some instruction for the purpose of Soyga
VR ⸺ Peace . you muſt vſe Michaël.
Δ ⸺ I know no meanes or order to vſe in the invocat{my} of Michaël
VR ⸺ He is to be invocated by certayn of the pſalmes of Dauid, and
  prayers . The which pſalmes, are nothing els, but a means vnto the
  seat and Maiestie of God : whereby you gather with your ſelues due
  powre; to apply your natures to the holy Angels . I mean the pſalmes ,
  commonly called the Seven pſalmes . You must vſe pleaſant ſa{uou}rs:
  with hand and hart : Whereby you ſhall allure him and wy{nn} him
  ( through Gods fauour ) to atteyn vnto the thing , you have long sowght for.
There must be Con{i..}ction of myndes in prayer, betyxt you two, to
  God contynually.
Yt is the wyll of God , that you ſhold , ioinctly , haue the knowledge
 of his Angells togither
You had atteyned vnto the Sight of Michaël , but for the imperfection
 of Saul.
Be of good Cumfort.
Δ ⸺ The chayre cam into the stone againe : and I axed what
  it ment .
VR.⸺ This is a seat of perfection : from the which , things ſhall be
 ſhewed vnto the , which thou hast long desyred .
Δ ⸺ Then was there a square Table browght into the stone : and I
   demanded, what that Table betokened .
VR ⸺ A Mysterie, not yet to be known . These two, ſhall remayn
in the stone , to the sight of all vndefyled Creatures .
you must vſe a fowre square Table , two cubits square : where vppon
muſt be set Sigillum Dei ‹D{uuni}tatis› , which is allready *perfected in a
boke of thyne :    Blessed be God , in all his Myſteries, and Holy in
all his works.    This seal muſt not be loked on , without great reurence
and deuotion  .  This seale is to be made of perfect wax .  I mean, wax ,
which is clean purified : we haue no respect of cullours.
This seal muſt be 9 ynches in diameter : The rowndness muſt be 27
ynches , and somwhat more . The Thicknes of it, must be of an ynche
and half a quarter . and a figure of a crosse , must be on the back ſide
of it, made thus :

The Table is to be made of swete wood : and to be of two Cubits high .
with 4 feate : with 4 of the former seales vnder the 4 feet.
Δ ⸺ The faſhion of the 4 feet , standing vppon the foreſayd rownd ſeales ,
   was ſhewed : ſo as the vttermost circle conteyning the letters, did ſeme to be
   clean \*without the cumpas of the fete , equally rownd about the same fete .
   And these seales were ſhewed {mu}ch lesser than the principall seal .
   Vnder the Table did ſeme to be layd red sylk, two yardes square .
   And ouer the seal, did seme likewise red sylk to lye fowr square : somwhat
   broader then the Table , hanging down with 4 knops or taſsells at the
   4 corners thereof .
Vppon this vppermost red silk, did ſeme to be set the stone with the frame : nigh
  ouer , and vppon the principall seal : ſauing that the sayd sylk was betwene
  the one and the other
The Table was ſhewed to have on the fowre sides of it , \*Characters and names
 these, that are in a schedule annexed , in 4 diuerse rowes .
VR ⸺ The characters and words on the sides of the square Table, are to
  be written with yellow , made of perfect oyle , vſed in the church.
Δ ⸺ What oyl is that
VR ⸺ of oyl ſhalbe opened vnto you . The oyle, is perfect prayers :
    of other oyle I haue no respect.
    We sanctifie , bycauſe we are holy : and you sanctify bycauſe of your holines
VR ⸺ There is a spirit, named Lundrumguffa vſing you
    who seketh your deſtruction , in the hatred of men , in the hurt of
    thy goods . Diſcharge him to morrow with Brymstone.
    He harmeth thy howſe , and ſeketh the deſtruction of thy dowghter .
    His pretence was to haue maymed the in thy sholder the last night ,
    and long ago .        Yf thow do not diſcharge him to morrow ,
    he will hurt, both thy wife and thy dowghter.
He is here* now
Giue him a generall dyſcharge from your family and howſe
He will seke Sauls death , who is accurſed.
Δ ⸺ I know no means, or art to do this by . For I did burn in flame
   of Brymſtone, Maher{ion} his name and Character , whan I fownd
   Saul priuilie dealing with him ( which manner of wicked dealing
     I had oft forbydden him ). and yet he cam after, and wold haue
     carryed Saul away quick : as Robert Hilton, George, and other
     of my howſe can teſtify .
VR ⸺ The Curſed, will com͠e to the curſed.
Δ ⸺ I beſeche you to diſcharge him : and to bynde him ſom{ware},
wherefor of, as Raphael did ( for Thobias sake) with the wydke{d}
  spirit Asmodeus
VR ⸺ But Thobias did his part . Art is vayne, in respect {of}
   of God his powre . Brymstone is a mean
Δ ⸺ Whan ſhall I do this ?
VR ⸺ To morrow at the tyme of prayers.
          Δ ⸺ Gloria P{r}ĩ et filio et spiritus sancto
               sicut &c.  Amen.
