---
edition_key: "manuscript"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 13r-14r"
---
Marty 15. Thursday. Hora 1¼ a meridie.

Δ ⸺ After ET his calling into the stone , appeared a tall man, with a sceptre
 (very great) of gold , glittring . His body all red : and out of his hed, did ſhote out
  beames of light , like the sonne beames .
Δ ⸺ I being deſirous, to know who he was , and his name, I requeſted him [erneſtly?]
    thereto . but he anſwered, as followeth .
⸻ Invocate nomen Domini, et agnoſcetis eum
Δ ⸺ Then I prayed the psalme , Deus misereatur {.}r͠i , et benedicat nobis &c
     after that, he ſayd
⸺ I am mighty .
Δ ⸺ Bycauſe he delayed to declare his name , ET the skryer did require
  him, in the name of God the father, Jesus Christ his sonne, and of the holy
  ghoſt, to expreſs his name : and he answered in speche
⸺ So I will by and by
Δ ⸺ Then he ſeamed to take from his hed little bright sparcks , like little candells
   endes : and to ſtick them abowt the chayre : and he went rownd abowt
the chayre : and than he spake, as followeth .
⸺ I am mighty, and working wonders : I am SALAMIAN .
   I rule in the hevens , and beare sway vppon erth in his name , Who be
   blessed for euer. Thow dooſt dowt at me . I am the servant of God ,
   in his light : I serve him . I say, I serve him , with ‹reverence and› feare.
   and reverence. My name is SALAMIAN : Mighty in the sonne ,
   worker of wordly actions , as well internall , as externall : known vnto
   God : Whose name I know , and bless for euer.
Δ ⸺ Then appeared a big flame of fyre by him in the ayre
Sal ⸺ Thow knoweſt not , or thow wilt not know , that Mamon , with
  his servants, are present abowt the : whoſe preſence doth hinder the preſence
  of the vertues Adonay our comming . Blessed be God , in the highest
   Amen .
Δ ⸺ He toke the forsaide flame of fyre, and flung it vp vnto the heven
  ward
Sal ⸺ Mamon is a king whome God hateth : whoſe ſect, contynually
   tempt , provoke and stir vp wickednes , against the Lord, and againſt
   his annoynted . But he dyeth : blessed be God for euer . Driue him away
Δ ⸺ It is incomparably more easy for you to do . And as for my parte ,
  I fele neyther in body, nor sowle , any token of his presence or working .
  Therevppon he cauſed the whole chamber ( which ‸we were in ) to appere very
  playnley in the stone : and so there shewed a great cumpany of wycked
  spirits to be in the chamber : and among them , one, moſt horrible and
  gr{iſe}ly? thretting, and approaching to our heds : and skorning, and gnaſhing
  at vs.
Sala ⸺ God determines his mysteries , by Arte and Vertue
Δ ⸺ Then he willed me very egerly , to drive them away . And I prayed
  fervently .   And there seamed One to com͠e into the stone , which
  had very long armes : and he draue away courra{g}iouſly : And
  so they were driuen away .
 After that preſently, cam one into the stone, all white
  Salamian reached this white one a Cup.
  The white man held vp the cup: and sayd , as followeth,
⸺ Lo, this is my name.
   God shall bless you . Fear not . your faithfullness provoketh me to tell
   my name , and this it is :(putting furth the Cup again ) for, I am called
   Medicina Dei . I will shew the , and I will shew you , the Angel of
 your Direction , which is called OCH
Δ ⸺ This name he spake : he shewed it allſo on the Table (before him) written.
Raph ⸺ He is mighty in the sonne beams . He ſhall profit the hereafter.
Δ ⸺ Then cam in an other , and sat down in the chayre : and he ſayde, as
   followeth .
⸺ The strength of God liveth : and God raigneth for euer
   I am Fortitudo Dei .
Δ ⸺ Why, then, you are Gabriel : and I toke you hitherto to be Michaël
┌Michael┐ How ſhall I then amend my boke , in respect of your name, allwayes,
┌wa{ie}s┐ before, written Michaël ?
For. Dei ⸺ What thow hast written , that hast thow writen: and it is true.
┌‸{..} {....} .┐ Write down this name POLIPOS .
       Doſt thow vnderſtand it ?
Δ ⸺ No , God knoweth.
For. Dei ⸺ When that day cometh, I will speak with the : yf thow
         obſerve that which I haue* commanded the .
         As truely , as I was with SALOMON , so truely will I be with the
Δ ⸺ ┌‸{....}.┐ Then cam in an other : whom we toke to be Vriel . for he went
 ┌went┐ allſo, as he was wont . and leaned at the Table .
For. Dei ⸺ search for wisdome and lerning , and the Lord will delieuer
          it vnto you .
Δ ⸺ I wold to god, I knew your name truely , or what peculier letter
   I might set for you , to Note your words and Actions by .
For. Dei ⸺ Name I haue none, but by my office .
           SALAMIAN cam not hither, but by me
           He is a mighty Prince, governing the hevens , vnder my powre.
           This is ſufficient for thy Inſtruction .
           I was with Salomon, in all his works and wonders :
             and ſo was thi s, whome God had appointed vnto him .
           The Dieuines know his name : and he is not hidden from the face
          ┌face┐ of the erth : His name is written in the boke wich lyeth in
           ┌in┐ the wyndow .
Δ ⸺ Do you mean Agrippa his boke ? And is it there expreſsed
   by the name SALAMIAN ?
For. Dei ⸺ I haue ſayde .
Δ ⸺ What order will you appoint vnto vs two , in respect of
   our two beings to gither ? My frende here, may haue other
   intents and purposes of his a[ff?]ayres , then will serve for me, for
┌for┐ his ayde hauing in theſe Actions .
For. Dei ⸺ Ioyne in prayers . For God hath blessed you . Dowt not .
           Consider theſe Mysteries .
Δ ⸺ Then they in the stone vſed talk to gither : but not well to be
  be diſcerned of the eare of E.T
   At length F.D talked very much, and spedily to E.T and
   diſcloſed vnto him ( which he expressed not to me, at the stone,
   but afterward ) all the manner of the practiſe , and circumſtance
   abowt the Action intended , with the Gold [lamin?],  the ring , the
   Seales &c And after I had spoken somwhat, in requeſting him ,
   to shew me the manner, How I ſhold artificially prepare euery thing
   spoken of{t} , he sayd
  Blessed be God, who revealeth all Myſteries . &c ‸
I am strength in nede.
And Lo, here is Medicine for the sore
We bless the Lord : We gouern the erth , by the societie of Gabriel :
Whose powre, is with vs : but he not here. &c
               Vse Patience
Vr ⸺ I lieued with Esdras : I liued in him , in the Lord, who liueth
     for euer.
Raph. ⸺ I leued with Tobie : Tobie the yonger.
Δ ⸺ This was the white creature, that spake this .
F.D ⸺ We liue in the Lorde : who be prayſed for euer.
Δ ⸺ I stode silent a good while .
F.D ⸺ what wilt thow ?
Δ ⸺ I did attend, what you wold ſay .
F.D ⸺ I haue sayd .
Δ ⸺ I haue byn long at this tyme , in my dealing with you . I truſt,
  I do not offend you therewith . But, for my parte , I cold finde in
  my hart to contynue whole dayes and nights in this manner of doing : euen
  tyll my body ſhold be ready to ſynk down for wearines , before I wold
  giue ouer. But I feare, I haue cauſed wearines to my frende here.
F.D ⸺ In vertue is no wearines .
Δ ⸺ Now they he ſtode vp, out of his chayr : and he, and they all, io{nictly}
  blessed vs , ſtretching theyr hands toward vs, Cr{o}ssingly . And so
    they went away. The Table and the chayre remayned.
      and the glyttring sparckles, or drops of ſteaming little
       lightes were of the chayre immedi{ate}ly .
                 Δ ⸺ Glorie, thanks, and honor
                     be vnto the Almighty Trinitie.
                               Amen
