---
edition_key: "manuscript"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 20v-21v"
---
Δ After supper Mr Talbot went vp to his chamber to prayers: and
Vriel shewed him sself vnto him: and told him that somwhat
was amyss, in the Table or seale which I had <Noted>
byn occupyed abowt this day. And therevppon, Mr Talbot cam
to me into my study: and {....}red the seale (or Tables) o{f}
me: for he was wi{sh}ed to co{rrect} somthing therin, (sayd he).
I d{.l..}ed him the seal. and he browght it agayn with in
a little tyme after, corrected: both in the {numbers}, for {.n..}ly {.}
and some {f}or place. ouer or vnder. and also in one letter or
place omitted. Which I denyed, of any place {om}itted by me;
that was expressed {but} {me}. And the {.....} I dowted, vppo{n}
Michael his words last spoken, vppon two pla{c}es th{en} {remay}-
{ing} yet empty. s{taying} Hij duo c{aluti} {sunt} ad {tua}. But
If I had omitted any, the{re} shold m{on.} th{..} two haue wanted.
Wherevppon he thowght good to ax Judgmet and dess{...}n{g}
of this dowte, by Michael. And comming by stone
He was erdy: I propownded this form{er} Dowte. he answered
Mi. Veritas est sola in DEO. Et h{æ}c oia {ver}a sunt
you omitted no letter or {histo}ry that was told you. But the
skryer omitted to declare vnto you. Δ. May I thus re{cor}de {it}?
Yt is iustly reformed by Vriel: the one being omitted of the de{sci..}
and the other not yet to by vs declared, might make that phrase
meete to be spoken, Hij duo cælati sunt adhuc.
Mi. Thow hast sayd. Δ I pray you to make vp that one
place yet wanting. THen he stode vp on his great brasen leggs
agayn: He called agayn: Semiæl Semi{æ}l. Than he cam,
and kneled down. <T>
Consummatum est. Δ The shewer (a white man) pluckt
oute a trumpet, and put it to his mowth, as thowgh he wold blow: but bl{ew}
not: and there appeared at the ende of the Trumpet the greke ω
Mi. It is done. Δ Then of the three 666 before Noted, with his
finger he put oute the two lowermost. and sayd  Iste est numerus {suus}.
ANd Michael did put his finger into the Trumpets ende and pulled furth a rownd
plate of Gold, WHeron was the figure of .1. With many circles abowt
it, and sayd omnia vnum est.
Δ The forme of the world
which appeared before,
vanished away. And se
my{ei}l went away.
And Michael cam and
sat in his chayr agayn:
and his brasen leggs wer gone. and vppon {our} p{a}w{sing} he sayd
Mic. Go forward. Do you know what you haue allready written?
Laudate Dominum in sanctus eius.
Note the Circumference (which is done) conteyneth 7 names:
7 names, conteyn 7 Angels:
Euery letter, conteyneth 7 angels:
THe numbers are applyed to the letters.
Wh{an} thow dost know the 7 names, thow shalt vnderstand the
7 Angells.
The Number of 4, pertayning to the first T, is a Number significa{iu}e:
signifying, to what place thow shallt next apply thy eye: and begynningplaced aboue, it sheweth removing toward the righ thand. Taking the
figure for the number of the place applyable to the next letter to be
taken. The vnder number, is significatiue: declaring, to what place
thow shalt apply the next letter in the Circumference, twoard the left hand.
WHich thow must reade, vntyll it light vppon a letter, without {nuber},
not signifying. This is the Whole
So shalt thow fynde the 7 principall Names: known with vs, and apply
able to thy practise.
Make experience.
Δ Then {lell}ing from 4T, 4 more places (toward the right hand) exclu-
siuely, I finde in that fowrth place, from, T, (but ^being) the furth fro the
beginning, and with the begynning) this letter h: with 22, ouer it.
Therefore, I procede to the right hand, 22 places: and there I finde
A, and 11 over it. Going then toward the right ^hand 11 places, furder: I finde
a litt{le} a with 5. vnder it: by reason of which, vnder place of 5. I
go toward the left hand, 5 places, exclusiuely; where I finde o with
10, vnder it: whervppon I procede to the left hand, farder by 10 places.
and there I see the letter t, and 11, vnder it: and therfore {going}
to the left hand 11 places, I see there th eletter h alone without
any number. Wherfore, th{at} letter, endeth my word, and it
is a{ll} ThAaoth: ys this, as it shold be?
Mi. That is not the name. Thow shalt vnderstand all in the next
call. The Rule is perfect. Call agayn within an h{ow}re
and it shalbe shewed.
