---
edition_key: "manuscript"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 17r-20v, 131r-132r"
---
[?] [my?]ſteryes , [?]
[?] [?]ow toward a thing, [?]
[?] [?]owſe is hollow , it is empty and voyde [?]
[?]ts : The God of heuen and erth, will ſend [?]
NOTE . We bring tydings *of light. The lord is o[?]
yo[u?] and we prayſe to gither. His name be prayſed for eu̅ [?]
in his Myſtries : O holy and eternall God .
Δ. he bowed down to the Chayre and then to the table , and sayd , Bene
dictus qui venit in , ( and there ſtayed a little ) ſayd agayn Bene
dictus qui venit in [n?]oi͠e Domini
Δ Than cam in Michaël , with a ſword in his hand, as he was wont [:?] and I
ſayd vnt[o] him , are you Michael .
Mich: Dowt not: I am he which reiyoce in him that reioycath in the
Fortitude and strength of God .
Δ Is this forme, for the Great Seale, perfect ?
Mi. The forme is true and perfect
Thow ſhalt sweare by the Liuing God , the strength of his Mercy, and
his Medicinall vertue, powred into mans sowle neuer to diſcloſe theſe
Myſteries
Δ yf No man, by no means, ſhall p[?]ue any thing herof, by me , I wold
think that I ſhold not do well.
Mi. Nöthing is cujt from the Churche of God . We in his Sain[?]ts
are bleſsed for euer .
We Separate the, from fy[l?]ed and wycked perſons : We move the to God .
Δ I vow, as you require : God be my help , and Gwyde, now and euer
amen .
MIC. This a Myſtery , ſkarſe worthy for vs our ſelues , to know , muche
lesso to Reueale. Art thow, then, ſo Contented ?
Δ . I am : God be my strength.
MIC. Blessed art thow among the Saints : And blessed are you
both .
I will pluck the, from among the wycked [Δ he spake to my skryer]
Thow Commytteſt Idolatry
But take hede of Temptation :
The Lord hath bleſsed the . This is a Myſtery .
Dee, what wouldſt thow haue ?
Δ Recte sapere. et intelligere. E[o?]
MIC. Thy deſyre is gra[u?]nted the.
[?] [?]wit[?]
[?] [they?] are corrupted . [?]
[?] [?]y haue byn vſed to the wycked [?]
page (20)
[?] will ſhew the in the mighty hand and strength of you , [?]
his Myſteries are : The true circle of his æter[al?] [?]
Comprehending all vertue : The whole and sacred Trinitie [?]
Oh , holy be he : Oh , holy be he : Oh, holy be he .
Vriel answered . Amen .
Mic. Now what wilt thow ? Δ I wold full fayne procede
according to the matter in hand .
Mi. Diuide this owtward circle into 40 æquall partes :
whoſe greateſt numbers are fowre . See thow do it presently .
Δ. I did so . Diuiding it first into fowre : and then every of
them into ten. He called, Semiel . and one cam in
kneled down: and great fyre cam out of his mowth :
Michael ſayde., To him, are the Myſteries of th[e?]ſe Tables know[?]
Michael sayd, Semiel (agayn) and by and by ,‸he ſaid , O God thow hast ſ[o?][?]
and thow liuest for euer . Do not think here I spoake
to him . Δ he spake that to vs, [le?]st we might [dotote?] of his laſt
speches ; as being spoken to Semiel : which he directed to the æternall god
and not to Semiel . Semiel stode vp, and flaming
fire cam out of his mowth : and than he sayd , as followeth.
Sem. Mighty Lord, what woldſt thow with the Tables ?
Mi. It is the will of God , thow fatche them hither.
Sem. I, am his Tables .
Behold th[e?]ſe are his Tables . Lo where they are .
Δ Then cam in 40 white creatures , all in white sylk long robes.
and they like chyldern : and they fallyng on theyr knees sayd
Thow onely art Holy Ho Holy among the higheſt . O God ,
Thy Name, be bleſsed for euer .
Δ Michael ſtode vp out of his chayre , and by and by , all his leggs
semed to be like two great pillars of braſs : and he as high as half
way to the heven . And by and by, his sword was all on fyre
and he ſtroke , or drew his sworde ouer all theyr 40 heds .
The Erth quaked : and the 40 fell down : and Michael called
Semiæl , with a thundring voyce, and sayd ,
Declare the Myſteries of the liuing God , our God , of one
that Liueth for evre .
Sem. I am redy. Δ Michael stroke ouer them , with
his sword agayne : and they all fell down , and Vriel allso [?]
knees And commonly at the ſtriking with his sword , flamyng
like lightening did flash with all .
Mi. Note : here is a Myſterie .

Δ Then stept furth, one of the 40, from the rest, and opened his brest, which
was couered with sylk, and there appeared a great T all of Gold.
Mi. Note the Number. Δ ouer the T, stode the figure of 4; after
[?] manner 4T
[The?] 40, all, cryed, yt liueth and Multiplyeth for euer: blessed be
his name.
Δ That creature did shut vp his bosome, and vanished away, like vnt a fyre.
Mi. Place that, in the first place. It is the name of the Lorde.
Δ Than there seamed a great clap of thunder to be.
Then stepped (before the rest) one other of the 40, and kneled as the other
did before: and a voyce was herd‸ saying, Prayse God, for his name is reuerent.
Michael sayd to me, say after me thus
Deus Deus Deus noster, benedictus es nunc et semper: amen
Deus Deus Deus noster, benedictus es nunc et semper: Amen
Deus Deus Deus noster, benedictus es nunc et semper: amen
Δ Then the Creature opened his breast, and fyre cam oute of the sone
as before and a great romayne G appeared
Mi. Write with reverence, These Mysteries are wunderfull, the
Number of his name, and knowledge
Lo, this it is. 9. Behold, it is but one, and it is Marveylous
Δ Then this Creature vanished away. . . . . . . . . . . .
Mi. The Seale of Gods Mercy: blessed be thy name.
Δ It semed to rayne, as thouwgh it had rayned fyre from heuen.
Then one other of the 40 was browght furth: The rest all fell
down and sayd. Lo, thus is God known.
Then he opened his brest, and then appered an H, (not of so big pro=
portion as the other), with the number of 7 over it.
Mi. Multiplicatum est Nomen [tuum?] in terra
Δ Then that man vanished away as it were in a golden smoke
Mi. Thow must not write these things, but with great devotion.
He Liueth. Δ Then cam an other furth: Then all falling
down sayde, Vidimus Gloriam tuam Domine. They were
prostrate on theyr faces. Then this Creature opened his breast.
and he had there a Tablet all of Gold (as it were) and there
appered a small t vppon it: and the figure of 9 vnder this.
letter t.
Mi. Mark it, for this is a Mystere: Δ Then that shewer (of the 40)
seamed to fly vp into the ayre, like as it were a white garment.
Mi. Illius Gloria sit nobiscum. Δ All sayd, amen: and fell down.
Δ Then stode vp another, and opened his bosom, and shewed on his brest
bare (being like syluer) a small h; and he pointed to it, and ouer it
was the number of 22.
Mi. Et est numerus virtitus benedictas Δ This shew[e?]r went a way like a
Videte Angelos lu[a?]s. White Cok flying vp.
Δ There cam an other in, and sayd
Et sum Finis et non est mihi Numerus. Sum Numerus in numero.
Et omni[s?] Numeras est mihi Numerus. Videte
Δ There appeared a small n on his skyn, being all spotted with Gold

Then he went away. like three fyres, red flaming, and coming to gather
in the myddst of the firmament. Δ you must Note that in y[?]
the whole world in [?] did seme to appere, heuen, and erth. C[?]
Mi. (Δ he cryded with a  lowde voyce) Et est vita in cælis.
Δ Then stepped furth one and sayd, Et ego viuo cu b[e?]ne viuentibus, and withall he [?]
kneeled down: and Michael stepped furth and toke of his v[e?]al[?] on his brest
an[d] he made Curtsy and stode vp.
Mi. Viuamus Halleluyah O sanctum Nomen [?]
Δ All fell down on theyr faces, and Michael stroke ouer them [?]
and a great flash of fyre: And this man his brest seemed op[en?]
hart appeared bleading, and therein the letter m, and 6, o[ver?] it thus 6/m
Mic. Benedictus est. Numerus Ag[?].
Δ Herevppon They all fell down
Mi. Orate invicem Δ Herevppon we prayed a psalme; one ‸my skryer saying one verse, and [then?]
I the other &c.
Mi: Omnia dat[a?] sunt a Deo. Δ Then cam one in, hauing a rownd Tablet in
his forhed and a letter o in his forhed: and 22 ouer it.
Mi. Et non est finis in illo.
Benedictus es tu Deus Δ and then that shower vanished away: He
flew vp, like a rownd raynbow knyt togither at the ends.
Mi. Angeli a nomine tuo proa[dent Domine
Tu es primus O Halleluyah.
Δ. One stode vp and the rest fell down, and out of his mowth that stode, cam
a sworde: and the point, a Δ Triangle, and in the myddest o[f?] it a
small a thus a⃤, of pure gold, grauen very depe:
Et Numerus tuas viuit in cepteris, sayd this shewer. The nu̅ber
was 20 22 ower the a .
This shewer went away with great [?] covering all the world.
Mi. Namen illius est nobiscum Δ. the stroke againe with his
sword ouer them . THen stode one vp : who, vppon his garment had an n : and he turned
abowt: and on his back were very many ([?]ns) n
Mi. Creasti tu Domine Angelos tuos ad Gloriam tua Δ. ouer the, n,
was the number of 14. uer that n (I meane) which was onely on his brest
Mi. Et te primus Creauit Deus Δ. Then the shewer flew vp like a star
And an other cam in, all his cloth being plucked vp: and so seamed naked: He
hath a little, a,. This, a, did go rownd abowt him: begynning at
his feete: and so spirally vpward: and he seemed to be all clay.
ouwer the, a, was the number 6.
Mi. Et Creata s[un?]t et pereunt in Nomine tuo. Δ and therwith
this shewer fell down all into dust on the Earth: and his white
garment flew vp, like a white smoke: and allso a white thing did
fly out of his body.
Surgit Innocentia ad faciem Dei.
Δ Michael did ouwer them agayn with his sworde, and it seemed to lighten
He began to speak, and he stopped suddenly, and fyre flew from his mowth
Mi. Innocentium Nomina, et sanguinem vidish Domine a Terra, et Iustus
es in operibus tuis Δ Then cam one in, all with a garment
all bluddy. he was like a chylde, he had a ball in his hand of perfume
which smoked: and he hath vppon his forhed a little h,. He bowed
to Michaël. and Michael sayd, Numerus t[uu?]s est infinity; et erit
to finish re[r?]um. Δ This shewer seemed to power him self awaye
like a flud of blud: and his garment flew vpward
Mi. Non est illi numerus
Omnia per[?] a facie Dei, et a facie Terræ:
Δ. Then stepped one furth, and like a water running rownd abowt him,
and he cryeth miserably, O benedictum Nomen tuu Domine.
Nümer[u?]s perijt cum illis. Δ A little, o, with 18 ouer it, appered
Δ This shewer seemed to vanish away, and to cause a gerat water remayn
ouer all.
Mi. Lux manet in temb[r?]is. Gloriosum est Nomen tuum.
Δ Then stept one furth from the rest, who fell down, as theyr m[anner] was.
Δ Note: All the Cumpanies of these 40, stode five togither, and
five to gither, and so in eight Cumpaneyes; each, of fiue
Δ This was a very white one: The vpper partes of his throate, seemed open
and there seemed to cum out of it fyre, in very many and diuerse cullours.
he sayd Trinus sum.
Mi. Benedictum sit nomen El
Δ THan in the myddle of the fyres or smoke semed an, l, th[.]s[.] placed,
on a bluddy Cross. and ouer the, l, the number 26.
Δ This shewere semed to haue three mens heds and to vanish
away in a myst with a thunder.
Mi. Labia mea laudant <hun{c}> Dominum
Δ Then cam a very fayre yong one in with long heare hanging on
her (or his) sholders: and on her belly appeared a great scotcheon; to hir,
or him, Michael gaue a flame of fyre: and she, or he, did eat it
Mi. Et hic est El. and so appeared a little, l, on the scotcheon.
and it waxed bigger and bigger: and a fyre did seame to go rownd
abowt it
Mi. Benedicta sit ætas tua: Δ and there appeared, 30, vnder the l.
Δ There cam a great many of little fyres and did seame to eleuate this
yong woman (or child) out of sight.
Michael stroke his sword ouer them agayn, and sayd
Natus est illa Lux
Ille est Lux noster.
Δ THen stept out an other and opened his white silk garment vppermost: and
vnder it, he seamed to be sowed vp in a white silk cloth
He had in his forhed an, n, in his brest an, n, and in his right hand an, n
Mi. Numerus tuus est benedictus Δ Theyall fell down, saying
Numerus tuus est Nobiscum: Nec adhu{c} nouimus fin{e}m <eius> illius
Ve{ni}es cum numero tuo O Vnus in «æternum.
Δ. and they fell all down agayn. This shewer departed clyming vp into
the ayre, as if he had clymed on a ladder.
Mi. Linguis suis cognoutrunt eum:
Δ All sayd, Benedictus est qui sic et sic est, throwing vp into the
ayre the corn{.}rd trenchers of this fashion all of Gold. The
one side of the trenchers was thus marked, and the other side had
nothing on.
Δ Then stept one oute: and fyre cam out and in of his mowth. he
kneeled, the rest fell down. This seemed a transparent body.
and he had in his eyes a small l: and in his forhed the figure of 8.
Mi. Note this, vnder. I meane the figure 8. thus, l8.
Δ. All sayd, Et es verus in operibus tuis. and so he vanished away in
a flame of fyre
Mi. Gaudete omnes populi euis gaudete omnes populi euis, ab hinc
Gaudete. Δ All sayd, Amen.
Δ. one stept furth saying, INcipit virtus nostra. he being covered
vnder his robe, all with armor: and hath a great G on his armor.
and the figure of, 7, ouer it. He went behynde Michael
and so vanished away
Mi. Recte Viuite omnes Sancti euis
Δ One stept furth: and opening his brest ,there appered a boke, and
turning ouer the leaves there appered nothing but a little r, and
13 over it. He went behinde the Chayre and so vanished awaye.
Mi. Hic est Angelus Ecctiæ meæ, qui {d}o{œ}at Ille viam meam.
Δ There stept oute a playn man, and vnder his garment a gyrdel, and
vnder his gyrdle a Rod: and in his hand he had a sworde, and in
his mowth a flame of fyre: he had a great H vppon his sworde
and vnder it 22. he went behynde the CHayre &c
Michael standing vp still vppon his leggs, like pillars of brass.
Δ I axed yf I shold not cease now, by reason of the folk tarying for
vs to come to supper.
Mic. Lay away the worlde, Contynue yor work:
Coniunxit spiritum mentibus illorum
Δ Then stept out one, hauing vnder his garment a little Chest, and therein
a mans hart raw: and the hart was thus with two letters, one on
the one side, <and the> o, and on the other a, g,: [Δas in scotcheons of
armes, where the man and <is> his wi{..}s armes or ioyned p pale, as the
heraulds term it: . This shewer shut vp the chest
and went his way.
Mi. Numerus illius est sine numero.
Δ Then cam in an other, saying
Tempus est Deum vestrum agn{o}s{at}e.
Δ This shewer his armes reached down to his feete: he shewed furth his
right hand and in it a little, t, and 11 vnder it.
Mi. stay, place this, in the secondplace. This went away.
Mi. Iymago tua, (mor{s},) est amar{a}.
Δ ¨Then cam one in, with a big belly, and fat cheekes: an half sword
perced his hart, and a little, y, written on it.
Iustus est malis deus mr. Δ The number of 15 vnder it.
Mi. Place it in the former place.
Mi. Opera fidelium, Delectatio mea. [Δ Then ran one in]
Hic est Deius mr. He shewed the letter of o on his naked brest. and
the figure of 8 vnder it. He went away.
Mi. Ecce, Iniquitas regnat in domo mea
Δ Then stept one oute very lean, all his body full of little e, and vnder
euery one of them, 21. He went away behynde the chayre.
Mi. Bestia de{u}oravit populum meum, peribit autem in æternum.
Δ Then stept out one i nbluddy apparell. all his body full of serpents heds
and a b on his forhed, and the number of 10 ouer it. He went away.
Mi Iniquitas Abundat in templo meo, et sancti viuunt cu Iniquis.
Δ One very lean, hungerster{ne}d cam out, an A on his brest, and, 11, over it
and so went away.
Δ There cam in an other
Mi. Iniqua est Terra malatijs suis
Δ Then cam in one who drew out a bluddy sworde. on his brest a great romayneI, and 15 over it. he went his way
Mi. Angeliu e{ui}s minis{tr}auerunt sanctis. Δ Then stept one oute with a
Target and a little a on it, and ouer it the number of 8: he went away.
Mi. Gregnabit Iniquitas pro tempore. Δ They all cryed Halleluyah
Δ Then stept one furth with a golden crown, and a great ar{ming} sworde
his clothing all of gold with a lette<r> r on his sworde and, 16, ouer it
and so he went away.
Mi. Nulla re{y}na{t} virtus sup terra. Δ Then stept one oute, hauing all
his body vnder his whole sylken habit (as they all, had) very braue after
the fashion of those dayes, with great ruffs, cut hose, a great bellyed
dubblet a voluet hat on his hed, with a feather. and he adva{u}nced him
self braggingly. He had burnt into his forhed a little n. and Michael
sayd. Non est numerus {i}llius in Cæli{s}. Δ He went away {&c}.
Mi. Antiquus serpens extulit caput s{uuin} deuorans Innocentes. Halleluyah
Δ Then cam one who put of his white habit: and he toke a sworde, and smote
vp into the ayre, and it thundred. and he had a seal (suddenly there)
very gorgeous of gold and precious stones. he sayd
Regnum meum. Quis Contradicet?
Δ He hath pro{ce}ding out of his moth, many little (enns) n. and on his
forhed a great A
Mi. Non quod est A, sed quod contradicit A.
Nec portio, nec numerus eius inve>ni}tur in cælo
Habet autem Numerum terrestrom.
Mysterium
Δ He shewed three sigures of, 6, set in triangle thus 666
Mi. Vobi{s} est Mysterium hoc, mosterius reuelandum.
Δ And there cam a fyre and consumed him, and his chayre away, suddenly.
Mi. Perturbat{ur} terra iniquitate sua
This shewer, his garments, white, vnder: his face as brass: his body gre-
vous with leprosy: hauing vppon his brest an o, with the number of
.10. vnder it: and so he departed.
Mi. Surgite o Ministri Dei. surgite (inquam). Pugnate: No-
men Dei est æternum
Δ Then cam two oute together: they had two edged swords in theyr hands
and fyre cam oute of theyr mowthes. One had a G, and 5
ouer it, the other had
[Δ we fell to prayer wherevppon Michael blessed vs.]
The other had an h on his sword, and 14 vnder it. and so they
went away.
Mi. Omnis terra tre{m}et ad vocem tubæ ill{iu}s
Δ. One stept out, and vnder his habit had a trumpet. he put it to his
mowth, and blew it not. on his forhed a little, o, and 17 vnder
it. He went awaye.
Mi. Serua Deus populum tuum, serua Deus populum tuam Israel, Ser-
ua (inquam) Deus populum tuum Israel. Δ He cryed this, alowde.
Δ One appeared with a fyry sword, all bluddy, <his vesture all bluddy>
his vesture all bluddy. and he had s.
Est numerus in  numero. Δ He went away
Δ I vnderstand it to be a letter, and the number 5 also. Mi. So it is.
Δ There cam one in with diuerse owgly fraces, and all his body skabbed
Mi. Nunc s{unt} Dies tribula{trus} Δ he had an a {on} his <face>
forhed and the Number 5 vnder it.
Mi hic est Numerus predictus.
Mi. Audite, consummatum est Δ This had a great pot of water
in his hand and vppon the pot, grauen, a with 5 vnder {he}
departed in fyre.
Mi. Angele prep{ara}to Tub{a}m tuam.
Δ Then cam one oute with a Trumpet. Venit Tempus.
Δ He offered to blow, but blew it not. on the ende of his Trumpet
was a little a and 24 vnder it: he went away.
Δ They all now seemed to be gon: Michael and all.
He cam in agayn and two with him. And he sayd, {..}j duo
cælati sunt adhuc. They two went away.
Mi. Vale. Natura habet terminum suum
Δ He blessed vs and florished his sword twoards, and ouer vs.
and so went away: and Vriel after him. Who all this while
appeared not.
