---
author_key: "Chamberlain, John"
recipient_key: "Carlton, Dudley"
category: correspondence
edition_key: "compilation"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 46-48"
---
LETTER ⅩⅤⅠⅠⅠ.

[Domestic Correspondence, State Paper Office, March 1, 1598–9]

Goode Mr. Carleton,
I receved both your letters of the 12th and 20th of the last, full
fraught both with theire owne store and much other goode matter
that came in theire companie. We kepe stil at a stay and do neither
movere nor promovere, but drive on with the weather to see what
time will bringe foorth. The Erle of Essex is crased, but whether
more in body or minde is doubtfull. Thinges do not succede as he
wold wish them, but new difficulties arise daily about his
commission, as touching the time of his abode, touching his intertainment,
and touching the disposing of places and offices, upon which points
and some others he is so litle satisfied that many times he makes it
a question whether he go or not. Sir George Cariea of Cockington
(by Plymouth) is named to be Treasurer of Ireland in Sir Henry
Wallopsb place ;c but whether he be to my lords liking or no I
know not. The rebells of Mounster and Connagh are not so united
but that they have many jarres among themselves, and of late a
bickering, wherin Patricke Condon (a cheife ringleader) is saide to
be slaine or sore hurt. Here was newes that Capt. Simmes and his
companie were cut a peeces by the ennemie, but, as far as I heare
since, it was but a private quarrell, in which Simmes miscaried.
On Satterday last Sir William Woodhouse, accompanied with fowre
hacksters, understanding that Sir Robert Drury was to come from
Totnam toward London, waited for him in the way, and set upon
him as he was comming out of his coach, wounding him in three or
fowre places, and, thincking they had dispatcht him, left him for
dead, but it falles out better with him, for he is like to recover ;
marry, his man that offred himself in his masters defence was slaine
outright in the place. Upon the first alarme at the Court there was
commaundment from the Counsaile for a privie search all over this
towne to apprehend them, but within two howres after (upon what
reason I know not) it was countermaunded. Some geve out that Sir
William Woodhouse shold be likewise hurt in the face and in the
hande, but I thincke it is rather geven out to move pitie than
otherwise, for I cannot learne he was neere daunger, and the match was
very uneven, of five to two, and they taken on the sodain. The
Lady Drury (Sir Roberts mother) died some ten or twelve dayes
since, and hath left Sir John Scot a fresh widower. I wrote you
in one of my letters that Sir William Woodhouse had maried the
Lady Southwell, but the matter was mistaken, though it were
generally bruited. One Doctor Ledsam, sometimes the Quenes
Chaplain, but allwayes a giddibraind fellow, hath lately stab’d and
made away himself here in towne. The match is made up twixt
younge Norrisa and the Lady Briget, second daughter to the Erle
of Oxford. We are stil fed with fresh rumors of Don Sebastian,
that he is ipsissimus, and that the Venetians have sent ambassadors
to the King of Spaine to signifie so much unto him ; and that there
have ben some great men executed of late in Portingale about this
busines,and many others translated into Spaine ; but I will lay no
wager of all this. For lacke of better matter, I send you three or
foure toyes to passe away the time. The letter of Squires
conspiracie is well written, but the other of Dr. Dee is a ridiculous bable
of an old imposturing jugler. The Silkeworme is thought to be
Dr. Muffetts,b and in mine opinion is no bad piece of poetrie. The
treatise of Henry the Fourthc is reasonablie well written. The author
is a younge man of Cambridge toward the civill lawe. Here hath
ben much descanting about it, why such a storie shold come out at
this time, and many exceptions taken, especially to the Epistle,
which was a short thing in Latin dedicated to the Erleof Essex,
and objected to him in goode earnest, wherupon there was
commaundment it shold be cut out of the booke ; yet I have got you a
a transcript of it that you may picke out the offence if you can ; for
my part I can finde no such buggeswords, but that everything is as
it is taken. I am going the next weeke (God willing) to
Knebworth, in which consideration I am not greatly sory for your stayeng
at Ostend, for I shold have injoyed but litle of your company, which
perhaps will come better to passe at some other time. And so,
wishing you all contentment both here and there, I commit you to
God.
From London, this first of March, 1599.
Yours most assuredly,
John Chamberlain.
[Addressed as before.]
