---
volume_key: "I"
edition_key: "compilation"
license: "CC0 1.0
source_key: "Local Gleanings"
---

[page 42]

The Wardenship of Manchester spoken of by the L Archbishop of Cant.

[...]

Afore dynner my bill of Manchester offered to the Q by Sir John Wolly to
signe, but she deferred it.

[page 43]

At two after none I toke a cutpurse taking my purse out of my pocket in the
Temple, &c.

[...]

Mr. Laward his sonne Thomas born at Noone or a little after, ¼ vel ½.
Consultatio et deliberatio prima cum Marmione Haselwood in fine istius mensis.

[...]

Mr. Francis Garland cam this morning to viset me, and had much talk with me of
Sir E. K.

[page 44]

Mr. Marmion Haselwood, Mr. Dymmock, and Mr. Hipwell, cam to me to Mortlak.

[...]

Barthilmew Hikman cam to Mortlak.

[...]

Barthilmew homeward.

[page 45]

Mr. Laward and Mr. Alred.

[...]

My bill for Manchester Wardenship signed by the Quene, Mr. Herbert offring it
her.

[...]

Payd Richard 20s. part of his wagis, and more I gave him 10s. for full payment
of all od reckenings of late.

[...]

Mr. Cave dyed.

[...]

The Master of the Rolls his curtesey, though I had never spoken unto him.

[...]

My coosen John Awbry cam to me, to recreate himself for awhile.

[...]

My servant Lettice discharged and fully payde. She went with Robert Charles by
water, hor. 2½ after dyner. [Repeated thus:] I discharged Lettice of my
servyce, and payd all duetyes untyll this day, her yere ending on the 8 of
Aprill. I gave her for a month over ijs. vjd. and for to spend by the way I
gave her ijs vjd, Robert Charles and my wife being by in my study.

[page 46]

The Signet, the Privy Seale, and the Great Seale of the Wardenship; £3. 12s.
borrowed of my brother Arnold.

[...]

My yong coosen, John Awbrey, was sent for to his father to London. Mr.
Partrich, his brother in Law [not his brother, in London], Richard Ward, and
other cam for him.

[...]

Barthil. Hik. went homeward.

[...]

I wrote to the Erle of Derby his secretary abowt Manchester College [not about
Manchester].

[page 47]

At None a sudden short vehement storm of wynde & rayne, the wynde at west.

[...]

Anne Powell cam to my service ; she is to have four nobles [= 26s. 8d.] by the
yere, a payr of hose and shoes.

[...]

The Erle of Derby his letter to Mr. Warren for the Colledge.

[...]

Dr. Awbrey died at midnight. My cosen, Mr. George Broke, gave me 50li in gold,
100 angels an angel is about 10s. and suffrines, hora tertia a meridie.

[page 48]

Mr. John Blayney, of Over Kingesham in Radnorshyre, and Mr. Richard Baldwyn of
Duddlebury in Shropshyre, visited me at Mortlak. The great grandfather of the
sayd John, and my great grandmother by the father side, were brother and
sister.

[...]

The two brethren, Master Willemots, of Oxfordshere, cam to talk of my
howse-hyring. Master Baynton cam with Mistres Katharyn Hazelwood, wife to Mr.
Fuller, &c.

[...]

Mr. Morgan Jones my cosen, cam to me at Mistres Walls twise.

[...]

Mr. Goodier, of Manchester, cam to me. 13? Dies natalis.

[...]

I gave Mr. Morgan Traharn his bill to Mr. Harbert.

[page 49]

Mrs. Mary Nevell cam.

[...]

A letter from Mr. Oliver Carter Fellow of Manchester College. I writt agayn to
him the sameday.

[...]

Mistress Mary Nevel went to London and so into Kent.

[page 50]

The Cowntess of Warwik did this evening thank her Matie in my name and for me
for her gift of the Wardenship of Manchester. She toke it gratiously : and was
sorry that it was so far from hens : but that some better thing neer hand shall
be ffound for me ; and, if opportunitie of tyme wold serve, her Matie wold
speak with me herself, &c. I had a bill made by Mr. Wood, one of the Clerks of
the Signet, for the first fruits forgiving given me: Camden Soc. by her Matie.

[page 51]

At Mr. Cosener his table at Grenewich : I spake that was greatly liked. Mr.
Sergeant Oliver Lloyd ; wold have disputed against, &c.

[...]

Very rayny all day, and had the wynde Northe E. and W.

[...]

I receyved Sir Edw Kellyes letters of the Emperor’s inviting me to his servyce
again.

[...]

Peperit Jana (nutu Dei) circa horam 4m a meridie. [Repeated:] Nata hor. 4 a
meridie.

[...]

Margarite Dee baptized hora 4½ a meridie. Godfather, the Lord Keeper, his
deputy, Mr. Crowne. Godmothers, the Cowntess of Cumberland, her deputy Misstres
Davis ; and the Cowntess of Essex, her deputy Mistres Bele. Barthilmew Hikman
cam to Mortlak on his own busines.

[page 52]

[A figure of a spider.] The spider at ten of the clok at night suddenly on my
desk, and suddenly gon ; a most rare one in bygnes and length of feet, &c. I
was in a great study at my desk, &c.

[...]

I gave Richard ijs. vjd. part of his wagis, when he went to his grandfather.

[...]

I dyned with the Erle of Derby at Russell Howse, Mr. Thynn there, and Mr. John
Statfeldt, German, being there.

[page 53]

To Elizabeth Feeld ijs for the Taylor.

[...]

To Elizabeth Feeld 15s. ; there remayneth— Elizab Feeld went from my servyce.
I dined with the Erle of Darby.

[...]

£6. borrowed of my cosen William Hetherley for 14 days to pay for Barthilmew
Hikman.

[...]

Margery Stubble of Hownslow [of Thisselworth is deleted], our dry nurse,
entred into the yere of her servyce begynning on Michaelmas Day, and is to have
£3. her yeres wagis and a gown cloth of russet. Edward Edwards … began his yere
of serving me allso on Michelmas Day, and he must have 40s. for his yere’s
wagis, and a lyvery.

[...]

My anger (hor. 5 a mer.) with Edward my coke bycause of his disorder.

[...]

Mr. Richard Western lent me £10. for a yere.

[...]

I dyned with Syr Walter Rawlegh at Durham House.

[page 54]

To Edward ijs. part of wagis. Mr. Banks sent [Camden Soc.: lent] me uppon lone
tyll after Christmas £5. Mr. Emery sent me £3. by my servant Richard Walkedine.

[...]

To Anne ijs. part of wagis : to Elizabeth Felde payd the rest of her yeres
wagis, and moreover ijs. vjd. given for the overplus tyme.

[...]

The old reckoning betwene me and Edmond Hilton made clere. Of his eleven pownds
demanded, I shewd him of my old note that he had receyved £6. 15s., and after
that Sted his 25s. and Mr. Emery his £3. lent him ; as I did shew him Sted his
letter, and Mr. Emery his letter of the last month. All these sommes make just
an eleven pownd. Payd to nurse Stubble in part payment of her wagis 5s.

[...]

To Anne 12d. Richard rode toward Oxford for my Arabik boke.

[...]

Sted was a suter to me for help in law against his father — contrary Dirkmans
executors did urge me for money. Thirdly I vrged Mr. Brofelde Atturny General
for som land deteyned from the Coll.

[...]

My goods sent by Percival toward Manchester.

[page 55]

My Arabic boke restored by God’s favor.

[...]

Goodwife Lidgatt payd her rent two quarters ending at the feast of the
Annunciation of our Lady next, 13s. 4d. Goodman Agar, the taylor, was by in my
hall at Mortlak.

[...]

Newes that Sir Edward Kelley was slayne.

[...]

Mr. Nicolas Bagwell of Manchester browght me a letter from my brother Arnold.
Lent to Mr. Laurence Dutton twelve shillings [in Greek letters]. My wife and
children all by coach toward Coventry.

[...]

I delivered unto Richard Walkedyne my man Mr. Robert Thomas his fustian dubblet
for ten shillings of his wagis, I gave him more when he was to ride down with
my wife 10s. whereof 6s. 4d. was due to him that he had layd out for me : the
other 3s. 8d. was of his wagis.

[...]

Mr. Lok his Arabic bokes and letter to me by Mr. Berran [?] his sonne.

[page 56]

I payed to John Norton, stationer, ten pownds in hand, and was bownd in a
Recognisance before Doctor Hone for the payment of the rest ; £10. yerely,
at Christmas and Midsommer £5. tyll £53. more 14s 8d. were payd. Receyved
£30. in part of payment of one hundred for my howse at Mortlake of Mr. Paget.

[...]

Nata filia comitis Derby mane circa quartam horam Londini.

[page 86]

I cam to Manchester a meridie hora 5.

[...]

Enstalled in Manchester wardenship inter nonam et undecimam horam ante
meridiem.

[...]

Warning given publikely against Tho Goodyer, &c.

[...]

Warning given publikly of licence given to Thomas Goodyer.

[...]

Sir John Byron knt, and Mr John Byron esquier &c., dyned with me in the
Colledg. I moved the matter of xijd. an aker of hay grownd of his tenants &c.
He promised well.

[...]

Margaret Dee begonne to be weaned.

[page 87]

I writ to Mr. Ashton of Lever and to Mr. Shevington.

[page 88]

Our Courts kept at Newton.

[...]

Possession taking in Salford.

[...]

My brother Arnold and Richard toward London.

[...]

I gave Antony Cowly 20s. and discharged him.

[...]

Antony Cowley went for[th?] early [?] from my howse, I know not whither.

[page 89]

Mr. Harry Savill, the antiquary, cam to me.

[...]

I wrote by Mr. Harry Savill of the bonk, dwelling at Hallyfax, to Christopher
Saxton ad Dunningley. I sent my letter to Sir Robert Cicill’s house by William
Debdell.

[page 90]

The Commission for the Colledge sent to London to be engrossed in the Duchy
office. I sent by Nicholas Baguely of Newton to Mr. Brognole [not Brogerton]
and to William Nicolson to follow it this terme.

[page 91]

Mr. Christopher Saxton cam to me.

[...]

Entred upon great Brereridings in Salford.

[...]

Barthilmew cam.

[...]

Order taken by the sherif betwene me and Raf Holden.

[page 92]

The Erle of Derby with the Lady Gerard, Sir [Richard] Molynox and his Lady,
dawghter to the Lady Gerard, Master Hawghton and others, cam suddenly uppon
[me] after three of the clok. I made them a skoler’s collation, and it was
taken in good part. I browght his honor and the ladyes to Ardwyk grene toward
Lyme, at Mr. Legh his howse, 12 myles of, &c.

[...]

Wyndy and rayny.

[...]

Mr. Savill and Mr. Saxton cam.

[page 93]

I, Mr. Saxton and Arthur Rowland, John [Crocker] and Richard [Walkeden], to
Howgh Hall.

[...]

I sent Roger Kay of Manchester with my letters into Wales.

[...]

Manchester town described and measured by Mr. Christopher Saxton. Given to
Nnurse Stubley 10s. part of wagis.

[page 94]

Occupyed with low controversies, as with Holden of Salford, and the tenants of
Sir John Byron of Faylsworth in the right of the colldg. Sending to Lancaster
to the county [?] and sending for Mr. Tyldesley or [to] Chester for
cownsaylers.

[...]

Given more to Nurse, when her sonne John Stubley went from me toward London to
be reconcyled to his master. I gave him 5s. The young man, Leon the hatter,
went with him.

[page 95]

Mr. Saxton rode away. The sessions day at Manchester.

[...]

Ales cam by Mrs. Beston’s help to my servyce. Thomas my coke went from me.

[...]

Isabell Bordman from the chamber to the kitchin.

[...]

Thunder in the morning ; rayne in the night.

[...]

The Erle of Darby went by Londonward ; dyned at Curtes’ howse. … Jane [in Greek
letters].

[...]

Mr. Thomas Jones of Tregarron cam to me to Manchester and rode toward Wales bak
agayn. 13 day to meet the catall coming.

[...]

I rid toward York, Halifax, and Mr. Thomas Jones rode toward Wales.

[...]

Much disquietnes and controversy about the tythe-corne of Hulme.

[...]

I cam to Manchester from York.

[...]

Cromsall corne-tyth obteyned by consent ; [subsequently added :] but afterwards
dowted of and half-denyed ; [written at another time :] then utterly denyed.

[...]

Mary Goodwyn cam to my servyce to govern and teach Madinia and Margaret my yong
dowghters.

[page 96]

Being Fryday I rid to Royton (7 myles from Manchester) to Syr John Byron knight
for a quietnes. [Repeated thus :] I rode to Syr John Byron’s to Royton : to talk
with him abowt the controversy betwene the Colledg and his tenants &c. He
pretended that we have part of Faylesworth Common within our Newton Heath,
which cannot be proved I am sure. We wer agreed that James Traves (being his
bayly) and Francis Nutthall, his servant for him, shold with me understand all
circumstances, and so duely to procede, &c.

[...]

17 hed of cattell from my kinsfolk in Wales by the curteous Griffith David,
nephew to Mr. Thomas Griffith, browght, &c.

[...]

Michael.

[...]

Mr. Francis Nicols and Barthilmew cam to Manchester.

[...]

H[ora] 10½. 27, H. 11 Deus est propitius [a red mark].

[...]

Rode homeward.

[...]

£4. 6. 0 given to my wife by Mr Francys Wodcote.

[page 97]

Mr Palmer cam to be curate.

[page 123]

I sent £4. to Barth. Hikman by Bradshaw the carryer.

[...]

Olyver Carter’s thret to sue me with proces from London &c was this
Satterday in the church declared to Robert Cleg.

[...]

Richard Key of Weram curate cam to me by Mr. Heton’s information, and I to try
him three monthes for 50s wages, &c.

[...]

John Morryce came to Man[-chester.]

[...]

£5. borowed of Mr. Mat. Heton.

[page 124]

John Morryce went toward Montgomeryshire. [Repeated :] This Monday John Morrice
went with my letters to Mr John Gwyn of Llandles and twelve more in
Montgomeryshyre, esquyers.

[...]

4li borrowed uppon my gilt tancard. [Repeated :] Delivered to Charles Legh the
elder my silver tankard with the cover : all dubble gilt : of the Cowntess of
Herfords gift to Francis her goddaughter, waying 22 oz great waight, to lay to
pawn in his owne name to Robert Welsham the goldsmith for iiijli tyll within
two dayes after May-day next. My dowghter Katharin and John Crocker and
I myself (John Dee) were at the delivery of it and waying of it in my dyning
chamber … it was wrapped in a new handkercher cloth.

[page 125]

The vlcer in the accustomed place of James right lower … inside brak after 5
days riping.

[...]

Mr. Heton borrowed of [me] the Concordantias Majores Roberti Stephani. He hath
allso my boke De Cæna of Doctor Pezelius.

[page 126]

Mr. Heton lent me £5. more, and thereuppon I gave him a bill of my hand for the
whole ten pownd, to be payd at Michelmas next. The other £5. was receyved the
11th of February last.

[...]

Barthilmew Hikman cam.

[...]

I lent Mr. Hopwood, Wierus de præstigiis Dæmonum.

[...]

A supplication exhibited by the parishioners.

[...]

Trubblesom days abowt Mr. Palmer the curate.

[...]

Mr. Hopwood. I had John Cholmeley my latyn boke in 8º De Morbis Infantum. I had
my Wierus de præstigiis Dæmonum from Mr. Hopwood, and lent him Flagellum
Dæmonum and Fustis Dæmonum in 8vo, for tyme till midsomer.

[page 128]

I sent Barth. Hikman 40s. I sent by Bradshaw many letters to London. I sent by
Goodman Thorp of Salford my great letter to the byshop of Lincolne, and one to
Mr Shallcross.

[page 129]

After none Sir Vrien Legh, Knight, and his brother, and Mr Brown, then Mr
George Booth sherif of Chesshire did viset me. Mr Booth sayd that he wold yeld
that to me that he wold not yeld to the Bisshop nor any other. I thanked him.
Mr Wortley of Wortley cam allso the same day hora 4 a meridie.

[...]

Mr Hulme and Mr. Williamson cam to me in the L Bishop of Lincoln’s case for
Hulme.

[...]

I, with Sir Robert Barber, curat, and Robert Tilsley, clerk of Manchester
parish church, with diverse of the town of diverse ages, went in perambulation
to the bownds of Manchester parish : began at the Leeless birche against
Prestwich parish, and so had a vew of the thre corner stake, and then down tyll
Mr. Standysh new enclosure on Thelmore wher we stayed and vewed the stake yet
standing in the bank of the dich, being from the corner a eleven measures of
Mr. Standley’s stik then in his hand, and 2 fote more, which stick I did
measure afterward, and it did conteyn in length feete. 6. ynche. 3. [That is,
6ft. 3in. × 11 = 68ft. 9in. This total, + 2ft. = 70ft. 9in. Dee puts the sum
down thus : “The Totall mesure, fete. 69. ynches 9.”] At which place
[Standysh’s enclosure] Tetlow servant to Mr. [James] Ashton of Chaterdon with
… did mete us, and. The survey geometricall of the very circuits of Manchester
parish was ended in this, being the sixth day of my work folks day [or doing].

[page 135]

The way to Stopford surveyed by John Cholmeley and John Crocker.

[page 169]

To Richard Walkeden 20s of his wagis payd.

[...]

The Lady Booth made acquayntance here.

[...]

To Isabell Boordman 8s. 8d. to make up whole yere’s wagis due at the
Annunciation of our Lady last past. ☞ I allowed to Mr. Williamson ten dayes
respite more for his kinsman to bring in his evidence for the process of the
brereridings &c. Payd to nurse 3s. to make up her full payment of her yere’s
wagis ended at Michaelmas last.

[...]

Sr Edward Fitton cam to me to Manchester. Open enmity, with Palmer before Sir
Edward Fitton. Sir Edward Fitton told Matthew Palmer to his face that he had
known him to be a mutinous man and a falsus(?) &c.

[page 170]

Thunder after three of clock afternone.

[...]

Friday night.

[...]

Thomas Sinkinson told me of John Basset his coming to London. Ed Whitlok.

[...]

The unlawfull assembly and rowte of William Cutcheth, Captayn Bradley, John
Taylor, Rafe Taylor, &c. at Newton, against my men describing the manor of
Newton.

[...]

Nat. Mr. Shauboobe betw. 2 and 3 in the morning.

[...]

Sanguinis per sedem magnus fluxius. Sciatici dolores in dextra &c tyll mydnight
& then stayed. God be thanked.

[...]

I rode of the Dunham Masey in Colledge affarys.

[page 171]

Newes cam from Hull of 23 barrells of Dansk rye sent me from John Pontoys.

[...]

I sent Roger Kay to Llanydles for cattall.

[...]

The Carriers to Wakefeld for the corn.

[...]

Toward evening, lightning and little thunder.

[...]

Thunder in the morning.

[...]

Five horse lode of Dansk ry cam home.

[...]

The strang pang of my joints of my back opening mane hora 6¼. In the Church
uppon Mr. Palmer’s disorder against Mr. Lawrence.

[...]

The last of my Dansk rye, in all 21 horse load.

[...]

This night I had the vision and shew of many bokes in my dreame, and among the
rest was one great volume thik in large quarto, new printed, on the first page
whereof as a title in great letters was printed Notus in Judæa Devs. Many other
bokes methowght I saw new printed, of very strange arguments. I lent Mr Edmund
Hopwood of Hopwood my Malleus Maleficarum to use tyll new yere’s tyde next, a
short thik old boke with two clasps, printed anno 1517. (Cf. 24 Nov 1582.)

[page 172]

The Erle and Cowntess of Derby cam to Alport lodg.

[...]

The Erle and Cowntess of Derby had a banket at my lodging at the Colledge hora
4½.

[...]

John Addenstall from Mr. Emery ; I wrote.

[page 173]

Mr Werall of Lobester within two miles of Donkaster cam to me to be acquaynted
with me.

[...]

[Dee’s Art of Navigation dated at Manchester. Beloe ii. 292. Cf. Autobiog.
Tracts, p. 25 ; and Ash. MS. 1789, fol. 51–115.]

[...]

Very wyndy (at Sowth) and rayny.

[...]

Showres Hayle this morning on Monday.

[...]

Lent by Mr Werall 40s. John Cholmley went with him to give him and other
physik ; and I answered John Cholmley the 40s. again.

[...]

Bartholomew cam.

[...]

Mr Olyver Carter his impudent and evident disobedience in the church.

[...]

He repented and some pacification was made.

[...]

I granted a lease of thre lives to Mr Ratclyf for two howses in Dene Square of
7s. rent both ; fine, twenty nobles.

[...]

Cam Mr Yardely of Calcot in Chesshyre, abowt six myles wide of Chester, toward
the Holt. Nova de philosopho D. Waldens.

[...]

Barthilmew went and Crockar. [Repeated thus :] John Crockar (my good servant)
had leave to go to see his parents. He went with Barthilmew Hickman and Robert
Charles toward Braibroke, with Arthur Golding, to cure of his fistula. John
Crocker intended to return about Easter or at Whitsuntide next. God be his
God spede. Mr. Humphrey Damport made our steward.

[page 174]

Rafe Holdens bill put up at the sessions. He preferred a bill against Richard
Walkeden and Antony Ryve for Brereridings chase entyrng &c which is fals &c.
The bill was not fownd.

[...]

Mr. Rigby the clerk of the [?] I saluted at R. Dickonsons Inkeper.

[page 175]

Nocte Amaritudo mea.

[...]

John Fletcher of Manchester went with my letters to Llanydlos this Sunday
morning.

[...]

Mr. John Cholmeley toward London by Market Harborow.

[...]

The fellows and the receyver agreed not with me in accounts. Paulo post nonam
mane, Arthur’s left eye hurt at playing at fence with rapier and dagger of
sticks, by a foyne of Ed Arnold.

[...]

Mr Burch his letter from Mathew Palmer.

[...]

The fellows wold not graunt me the £5. for my howse-rent, as the Archbishops
had graunted : and our foundation commaundeth an howse, etc.

[page 176]

I sent Ed Arnold to London on fote with my letters to D. Julio.

[...]

To Richard Walkeden 10s. and xs. in part of wagis. To nurse 10s. To Isabell. To
Ione.

[...]

I visited the grammar schole to see the ower(?) &c for Mr. Heton.

[...]

Mr. George Broke sonne to Mr. ⸺ Broke of ⸻ cam to be acquainted with me whom I
used most frendeley. Mr. … Ratcliff of Manchester cam with him, the 13. 14 :
but Mr. Heton allso cam on Tuesday after none when I had no leyser.

[...]

I wrote by the carryer Barret to D. Cæsar.

[page 177]

Edmond Arnold cam from London.

[...]

I lent to Mr Barlow for his sonne a Spanish grammer in 8vo, printed at Lovayn
anno 1555 by Bartholomæus Gravay in Spanish French and Latyn. To R Dickonson I
payd £7. 2s. for the plate and a new bell made till 1599 January 1st £66.

[page 178]

I wrote to Barthilmew and Charles by Bradshaw.

[...]

My brother Arnold to Chester and Llandlos.

[...]

Ed. Arnold with my letters to London.

[...]

Hora secunda a meridie I cam before the justices and informed against James
Shallcross and John Lawrence preachers for misusing my name to deceyve Mr.
Harrughby.

[...]

Walter Fletcher chirurgien from Barthilmew cam.

[...]

After midnight the College gate toward Hunt’s Hall did fall, and som parte of
the wall going down the lane. I receyved letters from Mr. John Pontoys, &c.

[page 179]

Walter Fletcher went with my letters to Barthilmew Hikman and Robert Charles.
Amaritudo mea circa mediam noctem.

[...]

The close was hyerd of Ed. Brydock for thre pownd payd beforehand by me John
Dee to the said Ed. Brydock, being £4 from Candlemas next [2 Feb] tyll
Candlemas come a twelvemonth. Mr Hary Savile sent me ij lings and ij haberdines
from Lichedelde.

[page 180]

George Birch sute was stayd at Chester uppon his promise to compownd with me
for all tyth-hay, and other matter. Thomas Goodyer his sute and excommunication
I stayed, salvo interim jure meo. Hugh Traves likewise for Ancotes tyth-hay I
stayed tyll Sir John Byron his coming. Baxter’s likewise I stayd at Chester
Court.

[...]

Newes from Mr. Smyth of Upton personage cam this Sunday.

[page 181]

Edmond Arnold to London ; thereuppon I sent spedily.

[...]

I wrote by Oliver Ellet the Taylor to Mr. Nicolls to Foxton.

[...]

Mr. Nicolls cam and wished to mete Ellet.

[page 182]

The Eclips. A clowdy day, but great darknes about 9½ mane.

[...]

Circa mediam noctem amaritudo mea.

[...]

Mr. Nicolls rode homeward, and met the messager a little beyond Stopford
[Stockport]. I lent Mr. Nicolls home with him Roger Edward’s boke to be browght
to me by Barthilmew Hikman.

[...]

I receyved Mr. Thynne his letter for Sted’s det, and Ed. Arnold his leter of
the sute for Upton, and of the Lord Archbishop [Whitgrift] his hard dealing.

[...]

I sent the statute staple to London to Mr. George Brok for Sted. I wrote
letters by John Hardy, and sent them in a box.

[page 183]

Newes of Mistres Mary Nevell’s death by William Nicholson, that she dyed the
Fryday after Candelmas Day [3 Feb.].

[...]

Borrowed 40s. of Mr. George Kenion of Kersal, to repay againe as sone as I can
conveniently. Receyved by Richard Walkeden.

[...]

Set out from London.

[...]

My return from London to Manchester. I, my wife, Arthur, Rowland, Mistres Marie
Nicols, and Mr. Richard Arnold cam to Manchester.

[...]

The Commission set uppon in the Chapter Howse.

[page 184]

This morning as I lay in my bed it cam into my fantasy to write a boke, De
Differentiis quibusdam corporum et Spirituum.

[...]

I writ to [Richard Vaughan] the Lord Bishop of Chester by Mr Withenstalls.

[...]

Mr. Nicols and Barthilmew Hickman cam.

[...]

Primo in vita mea mihi accidit Pulsus dictus Intermittens a Medicis in arte
sphygmita peritis, scz. post 5 vel 7, vel 11 unum intermittens ictum fortis
tamen erat et equalis, ego vero minime ægrotus eram, sed erat quædam animi
conternatio propter duorum videntium discoriam in suis visis &c.

[page 185]

F[rancis] N[icols] and B H[ikman] went homeward.

[...]

I willed the Fellows to com to me by nine the next day.

[...]

They cam… It is to be noted of the great pacifications unexpected of man, which
happened this Friday ; for in the forenone (betwene nine and ten) where the
fellows were greatly in doubt of my heavy displeasure, by reason of their
manifold misusing of themselves against me, I did with all lenity interteyn
them, and shewed the most part of the things that I had browght to pass at
London for the College good, and told Mr. Carter (going away) that I must speak
with him alone. Robert Leghe and Charles Legh were by. Secondly, the great sute
betwene Redich men [not Redishmer] and me was stayed and by Mr. Richard Holland
his wisdom. Thirdly, the organs uppon condition was admitted. And fowrthly, Mr.
Williamson’s resignation granted for a preacher to be gotten from Cambridge.

[page 187]

I lent Randall Kemp my second part of Hollinshed’s Great Chronicle for ij. or
iij. wekes. To Newton he retorned it.

[page 188]

We held our audit, I and the fellows for the two yeres last past in my absence,
Olyver Carter, Thomas Williamson, and Robert Birch, Charles Legh the elder
being receyver. I red and gave unto Mistres Mary N[icolls] her prayer.

[...]

I visited the Grammar schole, and fownd great imperfections in all and every of
the scholers to my great grief.

[page 189]

I had a dream after midnight of my enjoying and working of the philosopher’s
stone with other. My dreame was after midnight toward day.

[...]

I dreamed that a long betwene Algat and the postern on tower Hill did men stand
in a lane with pikes in theyr hands, as though more shold come to them or that
they wayted for some body : but theyr regard and loking was directly to ye
towre where certeyn great personages dyd stand : and one of them as upon a
stage did declare with a loud voyce to the pikemen matter of importance very
lowd and comesth[?] &c.

[page 209]

Eucharistam suscepimus, ego, uxor, filia Katharina, et Maria Nicolls &c.

[...]

A great tempest of mighty wynde S.W. from 2 tyll 6, with rayne.

[...]

9. yeres 3 months ende.

[...]

Mr Holland of Denby, Mr. Gerard of Stopford, Mr Langley &c, Commissioners from
the bishop of Chester authorized by the bishop of Chester did call me before
them in the Church abowt thre of the clok after none, and did deliver to me
certayn petitions put up by the fellows against me to answer before the 18th of
this month. I answered them all eodem tempore, and yet they gave me leave to
write at leiser. Circa 7 a meridie a storme of hayle and a clap of thunder with
some lyghtening.

[page 210]

Mr Hanmer and Mr Davis gentlemen of Flyntshire, within four or five myle of
Harden Castle, did viset me.

[...]

I burned, before Mr Nicols, his brother, and Mr Wortley, all Bartholomew Hikman
his untrue actions &c.

[...]

After the departing of Mr Francis Nicolls his dowghter Mistres Mary, his
brother Mr William, Mr Wortley, at my returne from Deansgate, to the ende
whereof I browght them on fote, Mr Roger Kooke offered and promised his
faithfull and diligent care and help, to the best of his skill and powre, in
the practises chymicall, and that he will rather do so then to be with any in
England ; which his promise the Lord blesse and confirm ! He told me that Mr.
Anthony considered him very liberally and frendely, but he told him that he had
promised me. Then he liked in him the fidelity of regarding such him promise.

[page 211]

Be it remembered that Sir Georg Both cam to Manchester to viset Mr. Humfrey
Damport, cownsaylor of Gray’s Inne, and so cam to the Colledg to me ; and after
a few words of discowrse, we agreed as concerning two or three tenements in
Durham Massy in his occupying. That he and I with the fellows wold stand to the
arbitrement of the sayd Mr Damport, after his next return hither from London.
John Radclyf, Mr Damport’s man, was with him here, and Mr Dumbell, but they
hard not our agrement ; we were in my dyning-room.

[page 212]

Receyved a kinde letter from the Lord Bishop of Chester in the behalfe of
Thomas Billings for a Curatship.

[...]

Mr. R C did begyn to destill.

[...]

The Commission and jury did finde the tithes [not titles] of Nuthurst due to
Manchester against Mr James Ashton of Chaterdon.

[...]

Oliver Carter his vari… before Mr Birch, R[ichard] L[egh] and C[harles] L[egh],
in the colledg howse.

[page 213]

Colledg awdit. Allowed my due of £7 yerely for my howse-rent tyll Michelmas
last. Arthur Dee a graunt of the Chapter clerkship from Owen Hodges, to be had
if £6 wer payd to him for his patent.

[page 218]

Borowed of Mr. Edmund Chetham the scholemaster £10. for one yere uppon plate,
two bowles, two cupps with handles, all silver, waying all 32 oz. Item two
potts with cover and handells, double gilt within and without, waying 16 oz.

[page 219]

Borrowed of — and of — for an yere.

[...]

Borrowed of Adam Holland of Newton 5li till Hilary day [13 Jan] a. 1601
[1601–2] uppon a silver salt dubble gilt with a cover waying 14 oz. For on
yere.

[...]

Roger Cook his supposed plat laying to my discredit was by Arthur my sone fownd
by chaunce in a box of his papers in his own handwriting circa meridiem, and
afternone abowt 1½ browght to my knowledg face to face. All was mistaken and we
reconcyled godly.

[page 220]

Deus libera nos + a malo.

[...]

Reconciliation betwene us, and I did declare to my wife, Katharine my dowghter,
Arthur and Rowland, how things were mistaken.

[...]

Jane came to my servyce from Cletherow.

[...]

R. K[oke] pactum sacrum hor. 8. mane.

[...]

Mr Roger Koke went toward London.

[...]

9th anni veteris, I receyved the long letters from Bar Hikman hor 2 a meridie
by a carryer of Oldham.

[...]

Mr Holcroft.

[...]

Mr Holcroft of Vale Royall his first acquaintance at Manchester by reason of
William Herbert his servt [not frend], &c. He used me and reported of me very
freely and wurshiply, &c. [Another note :]  Mr Holcroft of Vale Royall his most
frendely acquayntance and using of me.
