---
author_key: "Dee, John"
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 30-31"
people:
  - "Cooper, Jane"
  - "Dee, John"
  - "Fromond, Jane"
  - "Kelley, Edward"
  - "Laski, Olbracht"
  - "Saul, Barnabas"
places:
  - "Brentford, London, GB"
  - "Dee's house in Mortlake, London, GB"
  - "London, London, GB"
  - "Mortlake, London, GB"
scryer_key: "Kelley, Edward"
tags:
  - "correspondence"
time_of_day: "11"
---
  Thurſday Julii 4. hora 11. ante Meridiem. 1583.
  Note. Δ. When I came home yeſterday from the Court , and from London, and from the
Lord Laſkie, I found that E. K. was purpoſed to ride forth of  Town, and intended to be a-
way (as he expreſly told me) five dayes :  Certain Companions and his acquaintance having
ſo appointed with him, ſome tarrying for him in Mortlucke, and ſome at  Brainford ( as was
perceived this day afterward, and as he confeſſed unto me. )  Whereupon I thought good to
ſignifie ſo much unto the Lord Laſkie who meant to come and refreſh himſelf at my houſe,
as he was wont before ; either this day, or within two or three dayes after :  Who alſo de-
lighted in E.K. his company, &c. Hereupon about the time of E.K. his riſing I wrote theſe
lines, intending to ſend them preſently to the Lord Laſkie, that word might be returned of
his intent before E.K. ſhould ride, I meaning and hoping to perſwade E.K. to tarry ſo long,
and upon ſuch reſpect.

Nobiliſſime Princeps, in reditu, noſtrum Edwardum inveni, facie quidem læta : ſed itineri ta-
men, ut dicit, quinque dierum, ſe accingentem :  Hocque matutino tempore abitum vel iter
iſtud ingredi molitur ; Reverſurus (ut affirmat) poſt quinque dies.  Quid ſit ipſa veritas,
novit ille qui verus & Omnipotens Deus eſt noſter.  Hoc volui, iſto mane ſummo, vobis ſignificare, ut,
quid factu optimum ſit, Cogitetis  : De aliis, ſuo tempore,
                                    Væſtræ Celſitudinis fideliſſimus Clientulus
                                                            Joannes Dee.
        Julii 4. 1563.

This Letter being now written, and not yet folded up , my friend E.K. was ready and
came out of his Chamber into my Study ; and I told him that I was even now ſending word
to the Prince Laſkie of his rideing out, and return after five dayes; and ſo ſhewed him the
Letter : who when he came to the phraſe, Quid ſit ipſa veritas, he was ſamewhat offended,
ſaying,  What ſecret meaning hath this, upon ſome of your two former conference ?  Truly (ſaid
I) even ſuch as the circumſtance of the Letter doth import, that is ; Whereas you ſaid that
you intended to return within five dayes, or at the ſame dayes end, it is uncertain whether
you will, or ſhall, return later or ſooner : and therefore Quid ſit ipſa veritas of your return,
or intent to return, onely God doth know.  He would by no meanes admit that my ſincere
expoſition, but ſeemed ſuſpitious of ſome other undue conſtructions of thoſe former words ;
thereupon I took the Letter and tore it in three pieces, and ſent none : But in my mind re-
ferred all to God, his diſpoſition, aſſuring myſelf of God his moſt conſtant proceeding in his own
affairs.  Shortly after ſaid E. K. to me, Certainly here is a ſpiritual Creature in my right
ſhoulder, who ſenſibly ſaith to me, Come away : So ( ſaid I ) did one ſay to Sowle, when
they would have had him away to have drowned  him, whom I ſtayed in this Study by force,
and ſo hindered the Devil of his purpoſe then ;  as appeareth by that unhappy man yet alive.
Nay ſaid E.K. they have told me that if I tarry here, I ſhall be hanged ; and if I go with this
Prince he will cut off my head, and that you mean not to keep promiſe with me ; And therefore
if I might have a thouſand pound to tarry,  yea a Kingdom, I cannot :  Therefore I releaſe
you of your promiſe of 50 pounds yearly Stipend to me, and you need not doubt but God will de-
fend you and proſper you, and can of the very ſtones raiſe up children to Abraham :  And a-
gain I cannot abide my wife, I love her not, may I abhor her ;  and there in the houſe I am miſli
ked, becauſe I favour her no better.  To theſe , ſuch  his words ſpoken in great pangs and
diſquietneſſe of mind, I repoſed and ſaid, That theſe his doings and ſayings were not of God,
and that by my whole proceeding he might perceive what confidence I repoſed in his dealing
with the ſpiritual, our friends, ſeeing even to the uttermoſt penny (and more than my ability
ſerved unto conveniently ) I laid out ſtill about the ….ming of ſuch things, as were by me to
be done, &c.    Well, on the ſudden, down he went ; upon his Mare, and away toward
Brainford.   After whoſe going, my Wife came up into my Study, and I ſaid, Jane, this man
is mervallouſly out of quiet againſt his Wife, for her friends their bitter reports againſt him
behind his back, and her ſilence thereat, &c.   He is gone , ſaid I, but I beſeech the Al-
mighty God to guide him and to defend him from danger and ſhame ; I doubt not but God
will be merciful to him, and bring him at length to ſuch order ,  as he ſhall be a faithful ſer-
vant unto God, &c.
