---
author_key: "Dee, John"
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 5-"
people:
  - "Dee, John"
  - "Kelley, Edward"
  - "Lister, Isabel"
  - "Murifri"
tags:
  - scrying
---
Monday after ſupper 1583.
Δ. After ſupper, as we were together in my ſtudy, and attending ſomewhat the return of
the good meſſager ſpiritual, and ſaid that he promiſed to come again ſuddenly, he appeared
and anſwered.
Mur. …… So I am, write 7. 30.25. 44.37.35 46.
To the firſt S. to the ſecond O. the third L. the fourth G. the fifth A. the ſixth R. the 7th. S.
A. That maketh S O L G A R S.
Mur. …… Add the firſt, and laſt number together, it maketh 53. let that be the Centre to the reſt.
Δ. To be put to the Center of the Steptagonum.
Mur. …… So. The ground hereof is to be found in the third Table in the firſt book: I mean in
the third of the ſeven, the Table of B.B. &c. being the firſt.
My name is alſo to be found in the ſame Table.
Form this upon a plate of lead: It prevaileth as a cure againſt ſuch infections.  My promiſe
is done.
Δ. How is this to be uſed?
Mur. …… Uſe it upon the body moleſted, adding the letters of her name in a ſmall Circle on the
back half, not the letters in their forms expreſſed, but the number of ſuch letters.
Δ. We know not how to number her name in our letters.
Mur. …… Take them out of the ſecond Table (any Table elſe of the Seventh will ſerve) ſo that
thou take the numbers as thou findeth them placed with the letters.
Δ. How is this to be uſed about her body?
Mur. …… As by diſcretion ſhall be thought beſt: It prevaileth ſufficiently, ſo it be done, but thus
far I teach thee, and this, as concerning nature.
The health of him which ſent me be amongſt you, Amen.
Δ. Gloria & gratiarum actio perennis ſit Deo noſtro omnipotenti uni & Trino, Amen.
