---
author_key: "Dee, John"
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 2-3"
people:
  - "Dee, John"
  - "Esemeli"
  - "Kelley, Edward"
  - "Laski, Olbracht"
  - "Madini"
scryer_key: "Kelley, Edward"
tags:
  - scrying
---
After Supper.
Ma. ……Here is William Lacy Father to Hugh.
Here is Richard his Father. And here is Sir Richard his Father, and here is William, Sir
Richards Brother. Here is his going into France.
Δ. Quo anno Chrifti?
Mad. …… I warrant you my eldeſt Siſter will tell you all. Here is his going into Denmark.
My Siſter will come ſhortly, and tell you how he married in Poland, and what iſſue this Wil-
liam had.
Δ. I pray declare the Pedigree down to this Albert Laſcy.
Ma.…… Alas, I cannot tell whats done in other Countries.
Δ. I know you are not Particular of this Country, but Univerſal for all countries in the
whole world, which is indeed but one Countrey, or a great City, &c.
Mad. …… Well, my ſiſter will ſhortly come and tell you unlooked for, If you judge theſe things
well that I have ſpoken. Nam vera ſunt. Nam verus eſt qui me miſit.
Truth is all that is truth.
The Mortimer I ſpake of, is the firſt of the ſix: there were ſix Mortimers Earles of March.
Edmond was the laſt, and Roger the firſt; that Mortimer was the Grandfathers Grandfather of
this Edmond.
E. K. There ſeemeth ſome one to call her, whom I hear now.
Ma …… I come.
Δ. She took up her Skrolls on the ground, of which ſome were very old, and ſhe put up
her book.
Ma ……… This may ſtand you in ſome ſtead.
Δ. Mitte lucem tuam & veritatem tuam, Jeſu Chriſte, Lux vera,& veritatis perennis Fons,
Amen.

    Richard                             Laſcy.
  Edward       William                     Sir Richard
Dux Ebor.       Laſcy.                         Laſcy.
            France.   Richard.   Peter.         Richard
            France.   Denmark.   Poland.         Laſcy.
               1.        2.          3.
                                                    William Laſcy.

                      Geffrey Genvil.               Hugh Lafcy.
                       Wilde Genvill-
  Rogerus primus comes ═ Joan Genvill.                    Null.
  March.
