---
author_key: "Dee, John"
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 46"
people:
  - "Dee, John"
  - "Kelley, Edward"
places:
  - "Bremen, Bremen, DE"
scryer_key: "Kelley, Edward"
tags:
  - "Dee's journey to Krakow"
  - "poetry"
  - "prophecy"
  - "scrying"
---
  Δ. While we were at Bream, among many other things told and delivered to E.K. as he
was by himſelf, by a ſpiritual Creature, I know not who, nor of  how  good eſtate, or what
eſtate he was of :  This parcel among them he held in writing, and imparted to me; And I
thought my pains not ill beſtowed, to keep the ſame in record here.

          Ganilus that, in houſe moſt  fiery fairer than the Sun,
          Hath honour great, faith, give place, your former courſe is run ;
          Therefore firſt framed clouds unknown draw near with mighty ſtorms,
          Wherein ſuch bodies lie obſcur’d, or take ten thouſand forms.
          Your bellies ſtrowing long diſcloſe, and on the harlot earth,
          Seem fair to man, as when the waves as Midwife help … r birth,
          Twice ſhall the Sun put on the heavens, and once look quarter way,
          And working uncouth worlds, build up a City, where men ſay
          The Holieſt ſtood : And Beares bring in uſurping fire at hand,
          And people ſpread return, whoſe new built altars flaming ſtand.
          Whilſt ſuch as ſtrangers were Cateſy cry, and bloody knife,
          With privy ſhame defil’d bekyes, a thing n … ſometime rife.
          From midnight unto noon ,two parts and more ſhall ſlaughter feel,
          And all the World from South, taſte all, down force, of fire and ſteel.
          Small wonder though the earth at ſhadows fighting nothing grieve,
          When mighty Seas ſhall dry, and heavens lie, who can live ?
          That mortal eyes ſhall ſee a Temple built with precious Stones,
          Or Creatures ſtrange made new in ſight, of old and long dri’d bones.
          Or Angels dwell on earth : but I whoſe firy fingers can
          Unlooſe thrice ſealed Books, and utter worlds unknown to man.
          I ſee theſe curſed wights, whoſe borders lead thy journey on,
          Shall with the thirtieth moneth, be bought, or ſold, or fully gone.
           And England periſh firſt with Moths long harbour in her ſkirts,
           The Spaniard loſe their King, and France rebel and fall by Spirts.
           And holy man ten dayes beſieged at home, with theſe dayes whelps,
           Till he at length made free by ſudden force of vertues helps.
          The Poliſh King hath played, and friendly man ſhall then bear ſway,
          Amongſt earthly friends, and ſuch as hope of former faith decay.
          At laſt wear higheſt Crown, if fall from vertue makes no loſſe,
          And midſt this coil to come in ſpace of new come lays or toſſe.
          Then lo, Come other times moſt Holy, and a Kingdom ſhall,
          From Heaven come, and things forthwith  again to Order call.
