---
author_key: "Dee, John"
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 5-9"
people:
  - "Ath"
  - "Dee, John"
  - "Kelley, Edward"
  - "Kelley, Thomas"
  - "Lister, Isabel"
  - "Madini"
scryer_key: "Kelley, Edward"
tags:
  - scrying
---
Wedneſday a Meridie circa 2d. 1583.
Δ. E. K. Had been ever ſince nine of the clock in the morning in a marvellous great diſ-
quietneſſe of minde, fury, and rage, by reaſon his brother Thomas had brought him news that
a Commiſſion was out to attache, and apprehend him as a fellon for coyning of money. Second-
ly, that his wife was gone from Miſtreſſe Freemans houſe at Blohley, and how Mr. Huſey had
reported him to be a coſener, and had uſed very bitter and grievous reports of him now of late;
and that his wife was at home with her mother at Chipping Norton, whereupon, I conſidering
his great diſorder and incumbrance toward him externally, and his greater offending of God
with his furious impatience internally; and remembring the whole premiſes of God his ſer-
vice to be performed by us two (if we would be dutifull ſervants to his Divine Majeſty)
I was touched with a great pang of Compaſſion, both that any Chriſtian ſhould uſe ſuch
ſpeeches as he uſed, or be of ſo revenging a minde and intent as he ſhewed himſelf to be: and
alſo in reſpect of mine own credit to be brought in doubt, for embracing the company of ſuch an
one, a diſorderly perſon: And thirdly, that the good ſervice of God might hereby be taken
from our two executing, to our great danger, both in body and ſoul: Therefore to do my
duty as a man reſolute (upon our uniting for Gods ſervice) to do for him as for myſelf: I made
God my refuge for comfort, counſel, and help in this great afflicion, and croſſe of tempta-
tion.
Whereupon after my vehement and humble prayers for the foreſaid purpoſe, this voyce
was heard of E. K.
          I had (upon ſome reaſonable reſpect) ſet the ſhew-ſtone with the myſtery in it, on
               the Table by E.K. alſo.
A voyce. …… Let the daughters of light
Take up their garments, let them open the windows of their ſecret Chambers, for the voyce of man
hath ſaid.
Oh, ſhew thyſelf to be a God; yea, perform that which thou haſt already promiſed, ga-
ther your veſtures together, for thoſe that are ſick have need of help, you are the children of pitty,
and in the loins of compaſſion do you dwell: For I have ſaid, you are. And I have ſaid, my Deter-
mination ſhall not fail, although with the ſons of men my Determinations may be undeter-
mined.
Come gather up your garments, for the Cankers are ripe, and the Biting-worm ſeeketh to gnaw
into the Lily.
He hath ſaid, Let me prove them, for they are not juſt: Yea, let me touch them, for they are
unrighteous, I have granted him power, but without prevailing, I have given him weapons, but they
are not ſharpned, his fingers ſhall defile, and yet not deface: For I have appointed him a night, and
have prefixed an end thereunto, to the intent it may be known: That thus far I have ſtretched his
mouth.
E. K. I have heard a voyce about the ſhew-ſtone very great, as though
men were beating down of mud walls.
The thumping, ſhuffing, and cluttering is ſuch,
A voice. …… Ariſe, I ſay, for I will be revenged againſt the ſcorning of thoſe; yea, of thoſe
that are ſucklings.
Δ. After a great ſilence and pauſe, appeared one on the Table (without the ſkirts of
the ſilke ſarcenet) like a woman having on a red kirtle and above that a white garment like
an Iriſh Mantle, on her head a round thing like a Garland, green and like a Coronet under
the Garland, but not perfectly to be diſcerned; on her breaſt a precious Stone of white co-
lour, and on her back another precious Stone; both which Stones were ſet upon a Croſſe, in
the very center of the Croſſe.
Δ. Your external apparel (you Daughter of Light) you perceive that we have ſome-
what noted: but by the power and mercy of the external Light, we truſt and deſire to un-
derſtand ſomewhat of your internal vertue.
She ſaid …… What do you think I am a Jewellers wife by my apparel?
Δ. We deem you to be the Meſſenger of him that hath for mankind purchaſed the Jewel
of eternal Bliſſe, by the incomparable Jewel of his moſt precious Blood.
…… Will you have this too?
Δ. After a pretty while ſilence, I ſaid, We expect the execution of the purpoſe for which
you are ſent.
She ſaid …… It is written that Pride was the firſt offence.
Githgulcag knew not himſelf.
Therefore he was ignorant.
E K. She is much fimbling about the Stone on her breaſt, and re-
garding it.
E. K. Now She talketh with other whom I ſee not, her talke is very
ſhort and quick, but I cannot perceive what ſhe ſaith.
She. …… Read what I have ſaid.
I read the former words.
She. …… You will grant me that Pride is the greateſt ſin.
Pride was the cauſe he knew not himſelf.
Therefore Pride is the cauſe of Ignorance.
Δ. The Argument is good.
She. …… Ignorance was the nakedneſſe wherewithal you were firſt tormented, and the firſt Plague
that fell unto man was the want of Science.
E K. Now ſhe ſpeaketh to other again who appeare not, and they
ſeem to anſwer her again.
She. …… The want of Science hindreth you from knowledge of your ſelf.
E K. She looketh upon Δ. and ſmileth. Now ſhe ſpeaketh to the
unſeen people again.
She. …… Whoſoever therefore knoweth not himſelf, is proud.
Δ. God help us to know ourſelves for his Honour ſake.
E. K. She looketh upon Δ. and ſmileth.
She. …… You have time enough, therefore we may take leaſure.
Δ. [I made ſpeed to write.]
E. K. She talketh again with her inviſible company.
She. …… Pride is rewarded as ſin, Ergo the firſt offender was damned. What ſay you Sir?
[ſpeaking to E. K.]
What difference is between your mind and Pride?
E. K. Wherein am I proud?
She. …… In the ſame wherein the Devil was firſt proud.
Who glorified the Devil?
E. K. God.
Δ. God glorified not the Devil, but before he became a Devil he was in glory.
She. …… The abuſing of his Glorification made him a Devil: So the abuſing of the good-
neſſe of God toward this man, may make him a Devil.
The works of the Spirit quicken; the doings of the Fleſh lead unto deſtraction. Art thou offend-
ed to be called a Devil? Then extol not thyſelf above thy Elction.
No man is elected by proper name, but according to the meaſure of his faith, and this faith is
lively and hath a quickning Spirit in it forever. Indeed thou art ignorant, and therefore thou art
ſufficiently plagued: Why doſt thou boaſt thyſelf and ſay, This I can do?
The Reeds pipe, but it is long of the wind, and herein thou Sheweſt that thou knoweſt not thy ſelf,
for that thou art proud; pray therefore that thou mayeſt have underſtanding, and caſt away pride
if thou wilt not be counted a Devil.
By true underſtanding you learn, firſt to know your ſelves what you are: of whom you are, and
to what end you are.
This underſtanding cauſeth no ſelf-love, but a ſpiritual ſelfe-love.
This underſtanding teacheth no Blaſphemy.
This underſtanding teacheth no fury.
It teacheth a man to be angry, but not wrathful.
For we may be angry, and not offend. Wrath is to damnation.
Therefore conſidering that Damnation was the end of the firſt, which was Pride, and Ignorance,
the puniſhment of the ſecond (which is very loathſome.)
Pray unto God thou mayeſt avoid the firſt, and be unburdened of the ſecond.
Conſider by whom thou art counſelled, and of whom the counſel is: with us there is no cauſe of of-
fence, neither is the counſel given with a weak mouth.
Wilt thou be well rewarded? Why ſtudieſt thou not to do well? Wouldſt thou be one of the cho-
ſen? ſtand ſtiff and be contented with all temptations.
Is God a God of Juſtice?
E. K. It is true.
Be thou therefore a juſt ſervant.
No man inheriteth the Kingdom of Eternity, without he conquer in this world.
No man can challenge juſtly a reward, without he be a Conquerour, or do the workes of Juſtice.
Doth the Devil perſwade thee? Arme thyſelf againſt him.
Doth the World not like of thee? It is for two cauſes; either for that thou liveſt well and not
as a worldling, or elſe becauſe thy wickedneſe is ſuch as that the World wondreth at it. If thou be in
the firſt Rejoyce, For bleſſed are thoſe whom the World hateth; when they laugh at thy godlineſſe,
Be ſorry and grieve thou at their ſinfulneſe.
If thou offend in the ſecond flie haſtily from the World: Tell the World what thou haſt of hers,
and let her be aſhamed that thou knoweſt her.
Is thy fleſh ſtiff-necked? Faſt and pray, it doth avoide temptation.
Be ſorry alwayes; For in this World there is nothing to rejoyce at. For ſin onely provoketh
to forrow, whether it be of thy ſelf or of another.
Be ſtiff againſt temptations, for whoſoever is not armed as I am, ſhall be vexed with the weapons
of his adverſary.
My Garland is Godlineſſe, my Breſtplate is Humility, and upon my back I wear Patience.
Theſe do I wear to the intent I might ſhew you what you ſhould wear.
But as theſe things are placed in their croſsés, ſo do the croſſes alwayes follow them that wear
them.
Art thou puniſhed as an Apoſtle? Rejoyce; it is a happy croſſe.
Art thou vexed as a Tyrant? thank God it is in this world. For bleſſed are thoſe that are puni-
ſhed here, to the intent their ſins may be forgotten hereafter.
I perſwade to the contrary; Be humble, ſeek true wiſdom, then are you truely faſhioned accor-
ding to your Maker, and ſhalt reſt with us, with Halleluja in Heaven.
I have counſelled, I have done my meſſage thus far.
Δ. Your counſel is perfectly good, and your meſſage merciful. His name be praiſed and
glorified that ſent you. Amen.
As you were called hither, by the name of Daughters of Light: So this other day, there
was one ſent hither (of that bleſſed company) who was accounted a Daughter, and had ſix
Siſters more: That Daughter her name was Madini; ſo of your name we are deſirous to be
informed, for diſtinction and inſtructions ſake, in the trade of theſe myſteries.
She ſaid. …… It is good to know my name; to ſee whether it agree with my Doctrine.
E. K. What can you (for all your exhortation) accuſe me of:
Indeed I thank you very heartily for your exhortation and good counſel;
but hovv unjuſtly I am miſuſed at Huſeys hand, and ſo provoked to this
extream affliction of mind and ſundry unſeemly ſpeeches, be you Judge
between Huſey and me.
She ſaid. Whoſoever hath committed ſin and is not reconciled, ſhall have the reward of a ſinner.
There is a double Reconciliation, the one is with God, the other with the Conſcience. But this man
is not reconciled in Conſcience (repenteth not his wi{c}kedneſſe) thereby it followeth he cannot be
reconciled with God: Ergo he muſt be rewarded as he is. The reward of ſin is to be abſent, or ra
ther to be baniſhed in this world from the ſociety of God and his Angels.
So it falleth out to Regions and Countries, Cities, Kings and Subjects, Authorities and their
Officers, when (I ſay) they are eſtranged with abſence of their appointed and good keepers.
Therefore it proved that the Devil is moſt with him, and neareſt with him.
Whom the Devil is a Lord of, he uſeth as his ſervants, and where his ſervice may be greateſt done,
there is he moſt alledged. His ſubtilties are principal and great: And by theſe reaſons I prove that
Huſey is eaſily to be infected, either with envy, malice, ſlander, or diſhonour of Gods word.
This is one of thoſe Aſſaults that is promiſed ſhould aſſault you.
Who is to be blamed, he that conſenteth, or he in whom the procurement is? Thou didſt conſent
and chuſe him for a Companion. Be not therefore angry at his malice; for the fire that is, thou haſt
brought in with thine own hands.
To meaſure the Enemy his induſtry is impoſſible to look into, his ſubtiltie is more incredible.
The Reward of good life is great: But the filthineſſe that ſin carryeth withit in this World,
and leadeth with it into the World to come, is moſt horrible.
Is it not ſaid, That a ſkirmiſh ſhall be (and that great) but you ſhall be Conquerours?
It is written, It is true and ſhall be never overthrown; ſo mighty is his ſtrength that hath armed
himſelf with it.
In the Serpents belly, there is nothing clean: neither with unhoneſt perſons (ungodly I mean)
is there any pure ſociety: Light agreeth not with Darkneſſe, nor vertue with vice, therefore be you
of one, and in one, that you may agree and have the reward of one.
Behold it is ſaid, I will part bounds between the juft and the unjuſt, I will ſuffer the Enemy to
ſowe diſcord to the intent that thoſe that are my people may be ſeparated and have a dwelling by
themſelves.
Peruſe the Scripture, it is alwayes ſeen that the Spirit of God forceth Satan in ſpight of his
head to ſeparate the evil from the good by diſcord, and herein the Devil worketh againſt himſelf.
We good Angels keep ſecret the Myſteries of God; things that are to come we alwayes
keep cloſe with this exception, The form of our Commandment.
Truth it is that a Commiſſion is granted n{o}t onely to enquire of thee, but alſo to attach thee, and
that by the Council.
If he go down he ſhall be attached, therefore tempt not God.
Δ. But if he tarry here and his being here ſo known as it is, it is likely that he ſhall be at-
tached here to my no ſmall grief or diſgrace. What is your counſel herein?
She ſaid. …… It is written miſery ſhall not enter the doors of him whom the Higheſt hath
magnified. DIXIT, & DICO, & DICTUM SIT. The world ſhall never prevaile againſt you.
Δ. In reſpect of the Book, the Scrowl, and the Powder to be communicated, What is your
judgement or mind; ſeeing when he was coming from Iſlington with them, he was threatned
to be pulled in pieces if he came with them to me?
…… All that is ſpoken of, is in very deed, vanity. The book may be uſed to a good purpoſe.
They were wicked ones. But as theſe things are the leaſt part of this action, ſo are they not much to
be looked after.
Δ. As concerning the Powder (I beſeech you) what is your knowledge of it?
…… It is a Branch of Natures life.
It is appointed for a time, and to a purpoſe.
Δ. As concerning the earthes of the Eleven places being with expedition……
What is now to be done with them?
…… It was a foreſight of God, if they had been there now they had utterly periſhed.
Δ. O Jeſus, that is a marvellous thing.
…… Helas, that is nothing.
Δ. By nature they could not have periſhed in ſo ſhort time.
…… I have ſaid.
E. K. Tell us your name.
If you will remember my counſel, I will tell you my name.
E. K. Your counſel was by piece-meale told me, that I cannot remember
it but in general.
…… You do, and have, and I am almoſt H A T H.
Δ. I underſtand you to be A T H, in ſigillo Emeth.
A T H. …… So am I in the number of Gods Elect.
Δ. Shall not I make meanes to Mr. Richard Young, as one of the higher Commiſioners
to do my companion here ſome good?
A T H. …… Trouble your ſelf when you need.
E. K. She ſpake this ſomewhat ſharply.
Get your friends to ſignifie down good report ofyou.
Come not there in many years.
Δ. As concerning my writing of the holy Book, how ſhall I do, by reaſon of the perfect
writing it in the Due Characters? ſeeing many words are written ſo, as the pronunciation
and the Orthographie do hardly ſeem to agree?
A T H. …… You ſhall have a School-maſter ſufficient to read unto you.
Δ. Where ſhall I begin?
A T H. …… Let him lead you to that, who is within you.
Δ. As concerning Iſabel Liſter who is vext of a wicked ſpirit, how well have I executed
that which was preſcribed me; or how well doth it work?
A T H. …… Friend, It is not of my charge.
Remember the true path that leadeth unto true honour, where there ſitteth a True and Juſt
G O D, who grant you his Direction and eſtabliſhment of perfect life.
Δ Amen, Amen, Amen.
E. K. She is gone.
