---
author_key: "Dee, John"
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 239-240"
people:
  - "Emperor Rudolf II"
  - "Kurz, Jacob"
related_dates:
  - "1584-08-17"
  - "1584-08-24"
  - "1584-09-05"
  - "1584-09-11"
  - "1584-09-12"
  - "1584-09-13"
  - "1584-09-14"
  - "1584-09-17"
  - "1584-09-18"
  - "1584-09-24"
  - "1584-09-25"
  - "1584-09-27"
  - "1584-09-28"
  - "1584-09-29"
tags:
  - ſcrying
time_of_day: "13/19:30"
---
          Saturday, Septembris, 15. A Meridie hora (ferè) prima. † Pragæ
  I came to the foreſaid (called Doctor) Curtz: about one of the clock after Noon, who
had all the day been ready to have heard me, if I would ſo have had it: but I ſent him word
in the morning by Emericus, that after Noon, (as now at this hour) I would come to him.
Being come, he entertained me curteouſly: and two chairs being at the Tables end, he gave
me the preeminence (by a friendly kind of earneftneſſe) Then he told me, that long ſince
in Germany, he had heard of my fame, and had ſeen of my writings: and that he was very
glad of the opportunity now of my coming to this City; and that otherwayes he was deſirous
of my acquaintance, but chiefly ſeeing the Emperour his Majeſty Ore tenues (for that was his
phraſe) by word of his own mouth, had willed him to hear what I had to ſay to his Majeſty.
I began and declared my long courſe of ſtudy for 40 years, alwayes, by degrees going for-
ward, and deſirous of the beſt, and pure truths in all manner of ſtudies, wherein I had paſſed,
and that I had paſſed as many as were commonly known, and more than are commonly heard
of. But that at length I perceived onely God (and by his good Angels) could ſatiſfie my
deſire: which was to underſtand the natures of all his creatures, and the beſt manner how to uſe
them to his divine honor and glory, and the comfort of the elect, and alſo to the reproof and con-
fuſion of the adverſaries of his name and honor. And herein I had dealed ſundry wayes: And
at length had found the mercies of God ſuch as to ſend me the inſtruction of Michael, Ga-
briel, Raphael, and Uriel, and divers other his good and faithful Meſſagers, ſuch as I had
here now brought books (about 18) to ſhew him the manner of their proceeding: And
that I thought it good to begin at the laſt book, which alſo concerned moſt this preſent Em-
perour Rudolph. And ſo I did; and ſo by degrees from book to book lightly, I gave him a
taſte or ſight of the moſt part, and alſo let him ſee the Stone brought me by Angelical
miniſtery, &c.
  All things being ſeen and heard, that in ſix hours I could ſhew him: at length he required
of me what concluſion, or ſummary report he ſhould make to the Emperour. I anſwered, as
he had occaſion of the things ſeen and heard; but if he would follow my counſel (ſomewhat
expert in theſe Divine and Angelical doings.) That his Majeſty was to thank God for his
great mercies and graces offered: and that by me one, who moſt ſincerely and faithfully gave
his Majeſty to underſtand the will of God herein, and that his Majeſty was to, as Mary
(the bleſſed Virgin) did, to lay up all theſe my informations in his heart, and to ſay Ecce-
servus Domini, fiat voluntas tua, and ſo attend the manner of the Lord his proceeding, while
he framed his life, as it became every Chriſtian to do.
  He ſaid, that he would write (for his own memories help) ſome ſhort note of his obſerva-
tions of my ſpeeches, and things ſeen and marked: and that he would to morrow (being
Sonday) or on Monday, if he conveniently could, make a report to the Emperour, and ſo with
all ſpeed give me to underſtand further of the Emperor his Majeſties will and pleaſure.
Hereupon courteouſly he brought me down to the ſtreet door of his houſe; and I came home
after ſeven of the clock, and an half, in the evening.
      The mercies of God be on me, and his name be magnified and extolled in this world,
         and for ever.  Amen.
