---
author_key: "Dee, John"
calendar: "Gregorian"
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 182"
people:
  - "Ave"
  - "Dee, John"
  - "Kelley, Edward"
places:
  - "Krakow, Lesser Poland, PL"
tags:
  - "scrying"
time_of_day: "~19"
---
  Note. About seven of the Clock this afternoon, E. K. came again up into my study: and
seing me reading, and considering this Action, began to finde talk of it, and willed  me to as -say
the practise of it if I understood it: And, to be brief, by little and little fell to this issue,
that he confessed himself to be very sorry that he was so far raging in words as h{i}s was this
day.  Nay, (said I) any man living, else, would have found just cause of comfort, and to give
thanks for AVE, {su}ch speeches to him, as he  used  unto you upon true compassion, and no
skoff, &c. B{u}t you by and by called him Devil, and raged on f{u}rther against Michael and Ga-
briel, and the heavenly powers wi{t}h most horrible speeches,&c. He became very penitent, and ac-
knowledged that he had offended God: and said, that  surely it was of the Devil, for he did not
remember his words: but he is sure that they were not decent, and beseeched God to forgive
him: And so did I, and was very glad of this his reforming himself, and we (being oft (be-
fore) called down to supper) were going out of my Study: and as he was almost at the door
to go out, he said to me, I feel  a very heavy thing upon my shoulder: and it is warm with a{l}l:
Whereat I put to the door, and we sat down again: Verily thinking (as it was) that it was
the presence of AVE, whereupon I said into the Creature.
  A. In the name of Jesus, Ave art thou there, he answered immediately after as followeth.
  Ave…… Because thou [E.K.] ha{th} acknowledged my honour again: I will also acknowledge my
help toward you: But where  man curseth the Heavens, what {ho}ly Creature can abide?   Or
where Satan is brought into possession, by free will of man,  what good  Angel is he that depart;
eth not?
  A. O Lord, confirm thy mercies {u}pon us from henceforth.
  Ave. ……As concerning your Action, The Heavens bear witnesse of it.
Yea, yesterday did the good Angels contend with the wicked: and there
was a great conflict betwixt them; and that about the love of God towards
you, and your Action.    But I will visit you again in the morning, and
will perform my good will in God toward you.    But th{o}u must pray often
if thou wilt avoid temptation.     God be mercifull to you, forgive you, and
strengthen you to the end.
  A. Amen, sweet Jesu, Amen.
  A. When all was thus ended, I delivered to E.K. my Psalter book (with the short prayers
annexed to every Psalm) where he himself very devoutly, and penitently prayed three of
them, and I hearing also of them, gave my consent in heart to the same prayers.
  A. To God onely be all praise, honour, and glory, now and ever.   Amen.
