---
author_key: "Dee, John"
recipient_key: "Cecil, William"
category: correspondence
edition_key: "collection"
language: en-emodeng
license: "CC0 1.0"
# 🤷
location: "p 481-489"
places:
  - "Antwerp, Flemish Region, BE"
volume_key: "1"
---
Right honorable Sir, my moſt
humble obeyſance in due ſort
conſidered. Yt maye pleas you to
underſtand, that the approved wiſdome
wherewith th’ Almighty hath endued
you, and the exact bilance of Juſtice,
wherby mens doinges in your handes
are ordred, and the naturall zeale
aſwell to good letters (which from
your tender age hath in your breſt
contynually encreaſed) as to the
honor and weale publik of our cuntrye
which now in you freſhly flowreth
and eke yeldeth frute abundantly) :
theſe and other regardes have directed
my choiſe to you onely among ſo
many other in place of high honor
and governance. Choiſe, I ſay,
whereby your wiſdome juſtice and
foreſaid zeale may (if it ſo ſtand with
your good will) be tranſplanted in
landes full far, and people ſtraunge ;
yf my hand be not unlucky in
guyding ſo weldy a chardge. Therfore
briefly to place before your eyes the
chief of my requeſt, thus ſtandeth
my caſe. Albiet that our
Univerſities, bothe, in them have men in
ſundrye knowledges right excellent,
as in divinitie, the Hebrue, Greke
and Latin tung, &c. yet foraſmuche
as the wiſdome infinite of our
Creator is braunched into manifold mo
ſortes of wunderfull ſciences, greatly
ayding our dymme fightes to the
better view of his powre and goodnes,
wherein our cuntry hath no man (that
I ever yet could here of) hable to ſet
furth his fote, or ſhew his hand : as
in the ſcience De numeris formalibus,
the ſcience De Ponderibus myſticis,
and the ſcience De Menſuris divinis :
(by which three the huge frame of
this world is faſhioned, compact,
rered, ſtabliſhed, and preſerved) and
in other ſciences, eyther with theſe
collaterall, or from them derived, or
to themwardes greatly us fordering.
And for that ſome ſuch knowledges,
after my long ſerche and ſtudy, great
coſt and travaile (through Godes
mercy and grace) have fallen under
my perſeverance and underſtanding,
(whereof I am taught to render
account, with encreaſe of the Talent)
and ſo have forced my witt and
payned my ſelf to draw togyther and
diſcloſe by writing, ſuch proffitable
and pleaſant ſciences. And,
forſlowing no tyme (the frailty of our life
and health being as it is) I thought good
this ſeaſon of Chriſtmas
feſtivalls (commenly otherwiſe ſpent) to
make but a ſtart to Antwerp, and
there to employe that tyme in taking
and ſetting order with ſundry Duch
printers and other artificers, for the
true and diligent printing of ſuch my
labors, as I have by me ready for the
pres, and thereuppon I entended
furthwith to returne before Eaſter at
the fardeſt, bicauſe I hoped to have
founde thinges and men apt to my
purpoſe. But lo, ſo falleth it now
owte, that I cannot cumpas this my
entent on this wiſe, but am driven to
deale with printers of High
Germany, whereby a longer tyme will
runne. And alſo ſyns my cumming
(ſee I pray you) by diligent ſerche
and travaile (for ſo ſhort a tyme)
almoſt incredible, ſuch men and ſuch
bookes are come to my knowledge,
where they are, as, to the former
great ſciences I hoped never to have
had ſo good ayde, eyther by the one
or the other. So that in moſt
reverent wiſe (the premiſſes conſidered)
I make to your Honor my humble
petition, that ye will charitably
advertiſe me of your pleaſure adviſe and
cownſaile, whether ye will have me
furthwith to retorne, my bokes
unprinted and oute of my handes, and
alſo to diſdayne and neglect this offer
and noble occaſion at God his hand,
whereby his glory, the honor, ye and
(ſo may it chaunce) the weale of my
cuntrye be advaunced. Or that
you will herin declare your wiſdome,
juſtice and zeale, (which in many
other caſes far inferior to this you
have not withdrawne) in procuringe
leave, ye and ayde to my ſmall
habilytye to abyde the better by the
achieving ſo great a feate, as (by the
enjoying of theſe men and bokes) by
Godes leave I entend to aſſaye. And
for a profe more evident of my
endevor and purpoſe, yt may pleas you
to underſtand, that allready I have
purchaſed one boke, for which a
thowſand crownes have ben by others
offred, and yet could not be obteyned ;
a boke, for which many a lerned man
hath long ſought and dayly yet doth
ſeeke ; whoſe uſe is greater than the
fame thereof is ſpread ; the name
thereof to you is not unknowne. The
title is on this wiſe, Steganographia
Joannis Tritemij ; whereof in both the
editions of his Polygraphia mention
is made, and in his epiſtles, and in
ſundry other mens bokes. A boke
for your Honor, or a Prince, ſo meet,
ſo nedefull and commodious, as in
humayne knowledg none can be meeter
or more behovefull. Of this boke
the one half (with contynuall labor
and watch, the moſt part of 10 dayes)
I have copyed oute. And now I
ſtand at the curteſye of a noble man
of Hungarie for writing furth the
reſt ; who hath promiſed me leave
therto, after he ſhall perceyve that
I may remayne by him longer (with
the leave of my Prince) to pleaſure
him alſo with ſuch pointes of ſcience,
as at my handes he requireth.
I aſſure you the meanes that I uſed
to cumpas the knowledg where this
man and other ſuch are, and
likewiſe of ſuch bokes as for this
preſent I have advertiſment of, have
coſt me all that ever I could here
with honeſty borrow, beſydes that
which (for ſo ſhort a tyme entended)
I thowght nedefull to bring with me,
to the value of ⅩⅩ£. God knoweth
my zeale to honeſt and true
knowledge ; for which my fleſh, blud, and
bones ſhuld make the marchandyſe,
yf the caſe ſo requyred. Thys boke,
either as I nowe have yt, or
hereafter ſhall have yt, fully wholl and
perfit, (yf it pleas you to accept my
preſent) I give unto your Honor, as
the moſt precyous juell that I have
yet of other mens travailes recovered.
The underſtanding whereof I doubt
not to atteyne, by Godes grace, and
the conference with ſuch men as
allready are in my Kalender. Men
hard to finde, although daily ſeen.
And than that alſo, ſhall I think
your Honor moſt worthy of, for
procuring unto me dulcia illa ocia, the
frute wherof my cuntry et tota Reſp.
literaria, juſtly ſhall aſcribe to your
wiſdome and honorable zeale toward
the advauncement of good letters and
wonderfull divine and ſecret ſciences.
And herein that your will and
order with me ſhal be, I will requeſt
ſome of my frendes to reſort to your
Honor to underſtand ; the caſe being
unto them as ſtraunge as it to me
alſo falleth præter expectationem. As
knowethe the Almighty, who
preſerve your Honor with contynuance
of health and abundance of his grace
according to his good pleaſuer. Anno
1562. 16 Februarij.

Antwerpiæ apud Gulielmum Silvium
in Angelo aureo ; in platea, vulgirater,
Den Camer ſtraet, vocata.

Joannes Dee.

Domine ſalvam fac Reginam nr̃am
Elizebetham.

(Superſcribed)
To the right honorable Syr
William Cecyl, Knight,
Secretary to the Quenes moſt
excellent Matie.
